Convert Ltac chapter to prodn (#12103)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/proof-engine/ltac.rst

Syntax
------

The syntax of the tactic language is given below.

The main entry of the grammar is :n:`@ltac_expr`, which is used in proof mode
as well as to define new tactics with the :cmd:`Ltac` command.

The grammar uses multiple :n:`ltac_expr*` nonterminals to express how subexpressions
are grouped when they're not fully parenthesized.  For example, in many programming
languages, `a*b+c` is interpreted as `(a*b)+c` because `*` has
higher precedence than `+`.  Usually `a/b/c` is given the :gdef:`left associative`
interpretation `(a/b)/c` rather than the :gdef:`right associative` interpretation
`a/(b/c)`.

In Coq, the expression :n:`try repeat @tactic__1 || @tactic__2; @tactic__3; @tactic__4`
is interpreted as :n:`((try (repeat (@tactic__1 || @tactic__2)); @tactic__3)); @tactic__4`
because `||` is part of :token:`ltac_expr2`, which has higher precedence than
:tacn:`try` and :tacn:`repeat` (at the level of :token:`ltac_expr3`), which

> in turn have higher precedence than `;`, which is left-associative and part

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused.  Semantically, at least, `;` is fully associative.  What's the significance of it being left-associative here?

> in turn have higher precedence than `;`, which is :term:`left associative` and part

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused.  Semantically, at least, `;` is fully associative.  What's the significance of it being left-associative here?

Author: `;` is _parsed_ as left-associative, so a;b;c is (a;b);c.  But, yeah, a bit confusing because the underlying operation is associative.  Are there any operators where (a OP b) OP c <> a OP (b OP c)?  How about `+` or `||`?

Reviewer: No, + and || are both associative as well.  The `; [ ... ]` construct is not associative with `;`, as `(a; b); [ c ]` is different from `a; (b; [ c ])`.  I don't know of any binary infix operations of Ltac that are not associative, though there may well be ones I can't recall.

of :token:`ltac_expr4`.  (A *lower* number in the nonterminal name means *higher* precedence
in this grammar.)

The constructs in :token:`ltac_expr` are :term:`left associative`.

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Author: `cpattern` was incorrect even before I began updating the chapter.  `context` uses `Constr.lconstr`, which I've collapsed into `term`.  But it seems useful to keep this distinction in the doc.  They only need a sentence each to explain and it will be clearer.  I also want to bring back `uconstr`.  Maybe call these `term_pattern` and `untyped_term`?

FYI there is a `cpattern` in the SSR grammar, seems clear that that's something else.

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Author: Also, later in this paragraph, I don't see how the grammar accepts `%@?ident` in "an applicative pattern of the form %@?ident ident1 … identn".  What should this be?

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Reviewer 2: Another place where we could have done this kind of distinction but didn't do it is the syntax of `Search`...

> Also, later in this paragraph, I don't see how the grammar accepts `%@?ident` in "an applicative pattern of the form %@?ident ident1 … identn". What should this be?

The `%` is spurious. Someone probably thought that `@` needed some escaping.

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Author: Removed the %.  You asked to omit this production from term10 a while ago.  When and where do we re-add it?

`| "@" "?" ident LIST1 ident`

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Reviewer 2: Good point. We should definitely spend time explaining this pattern syntax in detail. First of all, we should clarify what is Ltac-specific and what is more generic. Everything that is generic could be documented in the same section as existential variables IMHO. To be left as later work, otherwise we'll never manage to merge this PR in a reasonable time frame.

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Author: OK, I'll leave a todo in the file linking back to here.

Also, BTW, what do you think about replacing `...` (3 periods) with `…` (ellipsis character).  I think that might be a bit clearer in, say, the tactic index?

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Author: For `cpattern`, I think the way to fix this (in this PR) is to rename `lconstr` as `term_pattern` and replace `cpattern` in the text with `term_pattern`.  And maybe also move the note somewhere else.

OTOH, when I try that change I see `term_pattern` in unexpected places--perhaps minor bugs in the grammar?  For example:

```
.. cmd:: {| Definition | Example } @ident_decl @def_body
   :name: Definition; Example

   .. insertprodn def_body def_body

   .. prodn::
      def_body ::= {* @binder } {? : @type } := {? @reduce } @term_pattern
      | {* @binder } : @type
```

WDYT?

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Reviewer 2: > Also, BTW, what do you think about replacing `...` (3 periods) with `…` (ellipsis character). I think that might be a bit clearer in, say, the tactic index?

Sure.

> OTOH, when I try that change I see `term_pattern` in unexpected places--perhaps minor bugs in the grammar? For example:

I thought `lconstr` and `operconstr200` where the same thing (i.e. what we call `term`). If that's so, then it is not surprising that you see this. More generally, the issue AFAICT is simply that the grammar of terms and patterns is shared. So there is no easy way around that, and I would simply remove `cpattern` and explain that `term` is to be understood as a pattern in the constructs that used it. Cf. my initial suggesstion.

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Author: > I thought lconstr and operconstr200 where the same thing (i.e. what we call term).

That's correct.

I expected that terms that contain `_` and `? ident` won't type check--is that right?

> So there is no easy way around that, and I would simply remove cpattern and explain that term is to be understood as a pattern in the constructs that used it.

It would be foolish to describe it syntactically, but it's simple to add a production `cpattern ::= term` or `term_pattern ::= term`, use the new nonterminal where appropriate and then describe the semantic limitation in text.  Sort of like what we did for defining `type`.

Probably the natural place to put this is with the definition of `term_evar`, though I could put it elsewhere.  WDYT?

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Reviewer 2: > I expected that terms that contain `_` and `? ident` won't type check--is that right?

That is not correct. If Coq can guess the value of the hole, it will type check. Cf. https://coq.github.io/doc/master/refman/language/extensions/implicit-arguments.html#casual-use-of-implicit-arguments

> It would be foolish to describe it syntactically, but it's simple to add a production `cpattern ::= term` or `term_pattern ::= term`, use the new nonterminal where appropriate and then describe the semantic limitation in text. Sort of like what we did for defining `type`.

That would feel OK to me in principle, but we are also facing the issue that sometimes such patterns are `lconstr` / `term` and sometimes they are `constr` / `one_term`.

> Probably the natural place to put this is with the definition of `term_evar`, though I could put it elsewhere. WDYT?

That was also my idea, but I'd like to clarify first whether the pattern language is exactly the same across Coq or is slightly different in the case of Ltac constructs. Therefore, for this PR, I would put the definition close to where it is used.

> The syntax of :production:`cpattern` is

Author: OK, I moved it match term.  We can revisit in the future.

   | @l1_tactics
   | @ltac_expr0
   tactic_arg ::= @value_tactic
   | @term
   | ()
   ltac_expr0 ::= ( @ltac_expr )
   | [> @for_each_goal ]
   | @tactic_atom
   tactic_atom ::= @int
   | @qualid
   | ()

.. todo PR For the moment, I've left the language constructs like +, || and ; unchanged in the grammar.
   Not sure what to do with them.  If we just make these indirections I think the grammar no longer
   gives you an overall idea of the concrete grammar without following the hyperlinks for many terms--not so easy
   (e.g. I have a construct and I want to figure out which productions generate it so I can read about them).
   We should think about eventually having a cheat sheet for the constructs, perhaps as part of the
   chapter introduction (use case: I know there's a construct but I can't remember its syntax).  They
   do show up in the index but they're not so easy to find.  I had thought a little about putting
   an ltac expression cheat sheet at the top of the tactics index.  Unconventional, but people would
   see it and remember how to find it.

   OTOH, as you rightly note, they are not really tactics.  Looking for better ideas that we are OK with.

.. note::

>    Syntactically, almost all tactics are in :token:`l3_tactics`.

Author: `simple_tactic` is in `l1_tactics`.

>    Syntactically, almost all tactics are in :token:`l3_tactics`.

Reviewer 2: OK, but then the following becomes confusing:

>The documentation also describes the following as tactics because they can generally be used anywhere a tactic can even though they fit into other levels of ltac_expr:
>- ...
>- l1_tactics are: first, solve, idtac, fail and gfail as well as match, match goal and their lazymatch and multimatch variants.

If the wording could be tweaked to make it a tad less confusing, it would be better. Not a big deal though.

      represents syntax described by :token:`nonterminal`.

   .. list-table::
      :header-rows: 1

      * -  Specified :token:`ident`
        - Parsed as
        - Interpreted as
        - as in tactic

      * - ``ident``
        - :token:`ident`
        - a user-specified name
        - :tacn:`intro`

      * - ``string``
        - :token:`string`
        - a string
        -

      * - ``integer``
        - :token:`int`
        - an integer
        -

      * - ``reference``
        - :token:`qualid`
        - a qualified identifier
        -

      * - ``uconstr``
        - :token:`term`
        - an untyped term
        - :tacn:`refine`

      * - ``constr``
        - :token:`term`
        - a term
        - :tacn:`exact`

      * - ``ltac``
        - :token:`ltac_expr`
        - a tactic
        -

:n:`ltac:(@ltac_expr)` can be used to indicate that the parenthesized item
should be interpreted as a tactic and not as a term.  The constructs can also
be used to pass parameters to tactics written in OCaml.  (While all
of the :token:`syn_value`\s can appear at the beginning of an :token:`ltac_expr`,
the others are not useful because they will not evaluate to tactics.)

> :n:`uconstr : ( @term )` can be used to build untyped terms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:n:`uconstr:(@term)` can be used to build untyped terms.
```
Spaces not necessary, and a bit jarring, especially as the `ltac:(@ltac_expr)` above has no spaces.  Currently it looks like:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/396076/84083840-60b47980-a9b0-11ea-960b-4b7366c39430.png)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/396076/84083848-65792d80-a9b0-11ea-8653-b3b65eb81e1f.png)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/396076/84083862-6a3de180-a9b0-11ea-81e6-e49df0dd5873.png)
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/396076/84083866-6e69ff00-a9b0-11ea-95ec-66246d14fef7.png)
(I think the first and last are fine, and the middle two would be better without spaces)

Author: Got it.  BTW, the last one would require a code change to the doc_grammar utility.

Terms built in |Ltac| are well-typed by default.  Building large
terms in recursive |Ltac| functions may give very slow behavior because
terms must be fully type checked at each step.  In this case, using
an untyped term may avoid most of the repetitive type checking for the term,
improving performance.

.. todo above: maybe elaborate on "well-typed by default"
   see https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r436317558

> Untyped terms built using :n:`uconstr :` can be used as arguments to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Untyped terms built using :n:`uconstr:` can be used as arguments to the
```

   OTOH, as you rightly note, they are not really tactics.  Looking for better ideas that we are OK with.

.. note::

   Syntactically, almost all tactics are :token:`l1_tactic`\s.
   The documentation also describes the following as tactics because they can
   generally be used anywhere a tactic can even though they fit into other levels
   of :token:`ltac_expr`:

   - :production:`binder_tactic`\s are: :tacn:`fun`, :tacn:`let` and :tacn:`info`
   - :production:`l3_tactic`\s include |Ltac| tactics: :tacn:`try`,
     :tacn:`do`, :tacn:`repeat`, :tacn:`timeout`, :tacn:`time`, :tacn:`progress`, :tacn:`once`,
     :tacn:`exactly_once`, :tacn:`only`, :tacn:`abstract` and :tacn:`infoH`
   - :production:`l2_tactic`\s are: :tacn:`tryif`
   - :production:`l1_tactic`\s are: :tacn:`first`, :tacn:`solve`, :tacn:`idtac`, :tacn:`fail` and
     :tacn:`gfail` as well as :tacn:`match`, :tacn:`match goal` and their :n:`lazymatch` and
     :n:`multimatch` variants.
   - :production:`value_tactic`\s, which return values rather than change the proof state.
     They are: :tacn:`eval`, :tacn:`context`, :tacn:`numgoals`, :tacn:`fresh`, :tacn:`type of`
     and :tacn:`type_term`.

.. note::

>    - The grammar reserves the token ``||``.

Reviewer 2: The way you've integrated this change will rebasing looks quite odd. I think the note should be below the one on precedence, which you cut in the middle.

because `||` is part of :token:`ltac_expr2`, which has higher precedence than
:tacn:`try` and :tacn:`repeat` (at the level of :token:`ltac_expr3`), which
in turn have higher precedence than `;`, which is part of :token:`ltac_expr4`.
(A *lower* number in the nonterminal name means *higher* precedence in this grammar.)

The constructs in :token:`ltac_expr` are :term:`left associative`.

.. insertprodn ltac_expr tactic_atom

.. prodn::
   ltac_expr ::= {| @ltac_expr4 | @binder_tactic }
   ltac_expr4 ::= @ltac_expr3 ; {| @ltac_expr3 | @binder_tactic }
   | @ltac_expr3 ; [ @for_each_goal ]
   | @ltac_expr3
   ltac_expr3 ::= @l3_tactic
   | @ltac_expr2
   ltac_expr2 ::= @ltac_expr1 + {| @ltac_expr2 | @binder_tactic }
   | @ltac_expr1 || {| @ltac_expr2 | @binder_tactic }
   | @l2_tactic
   | @ltac_expr1
   ltac_expr1 ::= @tactic_value
   | @qualid {* @tactic_arg }
   | @l1_tactic
   | @ltac_expr0
   tactic_value ::= {| @value_tactic | @syn_value }
   tactic_arg ::= @tactic_value
   | @term
   | ()
   ltac_expr0 ::= ( @ltac_expr )
   | [> @for_each_goal ]
   | @tactic_atom
   tactic_atom ::= @int
   | @qualid
   | ()

> .. todo PR For the moment, I've left the language constructs like +, || and ; unchanged in the grammar.

Reviewer 2: I do not think that this has to be resolved before merging this PR. I'm fine with the present state.

dependencies in the variables :n:`@ident__i` and returns a functional term
of the form :n:`fun @ident__1 … ident__n => @term`.

.. note::

   - If you want :n:`@tactic__2; @tactic__3` to be fully applied to the first
     subgoal generated by :n:`@tactic__1` before applying it to the other
     subgoals, then you should write:

     - :n:`@tactic__1; [> @tactic__2; @tactic__3 .. ]` rather than

     - :n:`@tactic__1; (@tactic__2; @tactic__3)`.

   .. todo PR I tried to improve the wording for the following bullet,
      but I'm not quite sure what it refers to.  Perhaps a fool's errand.

>       Does this issue still come up, and if so, exactly which productions?

Author: Does this also apply to qualids that appear in binder_tactics or simple_tactics?  If it's not specific to tactic_arg_compat, it should be explained more generally.

Also seems to me that `tactic_arg` should have a different name and that `tactic_arg_compat` should be called `tactic_arg`.  Any ideas?

>       Does this issue still come up, and if so, exactly which productions?

Reviewer 2: >Does this also apply to qualids that appear in binder_tactics or simple_tactics?

I don't think so.

> Also seems to me that `tactic_arg` should have a different name and that `tactic_arg_compat` should be called `tactic_arg`. Any ideas?

I agree and I already did a suggestion about this: rename the current `tactic_arg` into `ltac_value` and the current `tactic_arg_compat` into `tactic_arg`.

>       Does this issue still come up, and if so, exactly which productions?

Author: How about this?

```
Ltac X := idtac "hi".
Ltac X2 := let Y := X in Y.
X2.   (* output:  "hi" *)
```

But this doesn't work:

```
Parameter P : nat -> Prop.
Goal P 1 /\ P 2 /\ P 3.
repeat split.
Ltac one := 1.
Ltac two := 2.
swap one two.  (* Unbound variable one. *)
```

OTOH, this works.

```
Parameter P : nat -> Prop.
Goal P 1 /\ P 2 /\ P 3.
repeat split.
ltac: (let one := 1 with two := 2 in swap one two).
```

We oughta explain where and how substitution applies.  And name spaces (Ltac tactic names vs let symbols in ltac_exprs).

> rename the current `tactic_arg` into `ltac_value`

I think I lean toward `value_tactic` as we're referring to them as a flavor of tactics.

>       Does this issue still come up, and if so, exactly which productions?

Reviewer 2: > ```
> Ltac X := idtac "hi".
> Ltac X2 := let Y := X in Y.
> X2.   (* output:  "hi" *)
> ```

Yes, if you use a qualid as a tactic (and not in argument position), it should always be interpreted as a tactic. So the note that we were discussing does not apply.

> But this doesn't work:
> 
> ```
> Parameter P : nat -> Prop.
> Goal P 1 /\ P 2 /\ P 3.
> repeat split.
> Ltac one := 1.
> Ltac two := 2.
> swap one two.  (* Unbound variable one. *)
> ```

That's because `swap` expects a `int_or_var`, not a `tactic_arg_compat`.

> OTOH, this works.
> 
> ```
> Parameter P : nat -> Prop.
> Goal P 1 /\ P 2 /\ P 3.
> repeat split.
> ltac: (let one := 1 with two := 2 in swap one two).
> ```

In this case, the outer `ltac:( )` is useless. However, I do not understand how this can be parsed based on the rules that you show in the doc. This `ltac:( )` syntax should only be accepted in `tactic_arg_compat`, which cannot appear in such position AFAICT.

> We oughta explain where and how substitution applies. And name spaces (Ltac tactic names vs let symbols in ltac_exprs).

Sure lots of things to explain (out of scope for this PR though).

> > rename the current `tactic_arg` into `ltac_value`
> 
> I think I lean toward `value_tactic` as we're referring to them as a flavor of tactics.

Sounds good.

>       Does this issue still come up, and if so, exactly which productions?

Author: > In this case, the outer `ltac:( )` is useless. However, I do not understand how this can be parsed based on the rules that you show in the doc.

It's part of `term`:

```
term0: [
| term_ltac

term_ltac: [
| "ltac" ":" "(" ltac_expr ")"
```

Also, the `let` is an ltac let, not a term let; `with` is only supported in ltac let.  This also works:
`all: let one := 1 with two := 2 in swap one two.`

>       Does this issue still come up, and if so, exactly which productions?

Author: My original wording was incorrect.  It's not a grammatical ambiguity.  Does this look reasonably accurate?

```
   - :token:`qualid`\s within |Ltac| expressions are used to represent both terms and |Ltac| variables.
     If the :token:`qualid` corresponds to
     an |Ltac| variable or tactic name, |Ltac| substitutes the value before applying
     the expression.  Generally it's best to choose distinctive names |Ltac| variable
     that won't clash with term names.  You can use :n:`ltac:(@qualid)` or :n:`(@qualid)`
     to control whether a :token:`qualid` is interpreted as, respectively, an |Ltac|
     variable or a term.

```

>       Does this issue still come up, and if so, exactly which productions?

Reviewer 2: > > In this case, the outer `ltac:( )` is useless. However, I do not understand how this can be parsed based on the rules that you show in the doc.
> 
> It's part of `term`:
> 
> ```
> term0: [
> | term_ltac
> 
> term_ltac: [
> | "ltac" ":" "(" ltac_expr ")"
> ```

I'm well aware of that. What puzzles me is that a term is accepted in this position.

> ```
> 
> ```
> 
> 
> Also, the `let` is an ltac let, not a term let; `with` is only supported in ltac let.  This also works:

Yes, I'm well aware that this is an Ltac `let`. `with` is likely mostly intended for use in mutually-recursive definitions.

> My original wording was incorrect. It's not a grammatical ambiguity. Does this look reasonably accurate?
> 
> ```
>    - :token:`qualid`\s within |Ltac| expressions are used to represent both terms and |Ltac| variables.
>      If the :token:`qualid` corresponds to
>      an |Ltac| variable or tactic name, |Ltac| substitutes the value before applying
>      the expression.  Generally it's best to choose distinctive names |Ltac| variable
>      that won't clash with term names.  You can use :n:`ltac:(@qualid)` or :n:`(@qualid)`
>      to control whether a :token:`qualid` is interpreted as, respectively, an |Ltac|
>      variable or a term.
> ```

LGTM (apart from a missing word after "distinctive names").

>       Does this issue still come up, and if so, exactly which productions?

Author: > What puzzles me is that a term is accepted in this position.

See the "todo PR" starting with "This is defined programmatically rather than in the mlgs."  The production comes from there.  And please respond to that comment--I guess we should add those to the grrammar.

> I'm well aware of that.

I'm still learning so much of this, I'm apt to state things that are obvious to you from time to time.  And get confused, make mistakes, etc.

>       Does this issue still come up, and if so, exactly which productions?

Reviewer: To be a bit more explicit @Zimmi48 , the reason this is accepted is because it is included in the grammar for `tactic_arg`, which seems largely undocumented in the new grammar, as @jfehrle points out.

   - In :token:`tactic_arg_compat`, there is a grammatical ambiguity in
     how to interpret :token:`qualid`.  It could be either a tactic argument
     or just a :token:`term`.  This is resolved by checking first whether there
     is a tactic by that name, then whether it is a reference to a term and
     using the first one that's found.

     The default interpretation can be overridden by using :n:`ltac:(@qualid)` or
     :n:`(@qualid)` to force interpretation as, respectively, a tactic or a term.

     .. todo PR With the described behavior, it would never be necessary to use
        the "ltac:(@qualid)" form since it's checked first.

.. insertprodn ltac_expr tactic_atom

.. prodn::
   ltac_expr ::= {| @ltac_expr4 | @binder_tactic }
   let_clause ::= @name := @ltac_expr
   | @ident {+ @name } := @ltac_expr

>    ltac_expr4 ::= @ltac_expr3 ; {| @ltac_expr3 | @binder_tactic }

Author: It should be `ltac_expr`.  That fix will come in when the SELF fix PR is merged and I rebase.

   | @ltac_expr3 ; [ {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

>    | @ltac_expr3 ; [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

Reviewer: I don't think that's true; I think if you include the `;`, the tactic expression before it is mandatory.  However, the tactic expression+; as a chunk is optional

>    | @ltac_expr3 ; [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I follow.

What I was saying is just that the first rule of `ltac_expr4` allows for `ltac_expr3; ltac_expr3` (assuming the precedence levels are correct) and that latter `ltac_expr3` can itself be a `[> ... ]`. What did I miss?

>    | @ltac_expr3 ; [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

Reviewer: I think I was replying to an earlier version of it before the edit, where, iirc, it was just claimed that the expr to the left of the semicolon was redundant

>    | @ltac_expr3 ; [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

Author: > This rule is redundant

Yes, redundant because ltac_expr3 -> ...  -> ltac_expr0 -> multi_goal_tactics.

What is the difference between `[ {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]` and `[> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]`?  There was no explanation in the text--would be nice to add.  Also I wonder why that's not available as part of ltac_expr0.

>    | @ltac_expr3 ; [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

Reviewer 2: Only `[>` is supported at top-level. `[` is supported only after `;`. I thought this was the only difference but apparently it isn't. Cf. the issue I opened to understand the difference better: #12283

>    | @ltac_expr3 ; [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

Reviewer: I've explained the difference as I understand it at https://github.com/coq/coq/issues/12283#issuecomment-626208208 (from the point of view of a frequent user of both `; [ .. ]` and `[ > .. ]`)

>    | @ltac_expr3 ; [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

Reviewer: I've also added a historical perspective at https://github.com/coq/coq/issues/12283#issuecomment-626210310

>    | @ltac_expr3 ; [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

Author: I added a todo linking back to here so this can be addressed in more detail later. It would take more time than I should spend in this PR to unpack the details and draft appropriate wording.  The text includes the one-sentence definition.

   | @ltac_expr3
   multi_goal_tactics ::= {? @ltac_expr } %| @multi_goal_tactics
   | {? @ltac_expr } .. {? %| {*| {? @ltac_expr } } }

>    | @ltac_expr

Author: I spent way too much time on this one.  It would be much simpler if there wasn't a `|` after `..`.  I prefer 3b because it clearly breaks out the ltac_expr before `..`, which the text needs to refer to, whereas with yours I would have to use phrasing such as "The last ltac_expr before the `..`" and "All but the last ltac_expr before the `..`".  I could also go for 3.  Avoiding the separator character in the lists helps.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/81488533-dba63b00-921e-11ea-82bb-a2b76b2b830f.png)

This is from fullGrammar.  Note the empty production.

```
tactic_then_gen: [   (* multi_goal_tactics *)
| tactic_expr5 "|" tactic_then_gen
| tactic_expr5 ".." tactic_then_last
| ".." tactic_then_last
| tactic_expr5
| "|" tactic_then_gen
|
]

tactic_then_last: [
| "|" LIST0 ( OPT tactic_expr5 ) SEP "|"
|
]
```

As for a name, how about "for_each_goal" or "apply_for_each"?

>    | @ltac_expr

Reviewer 2: I understand your concern with my proposal but I still find yours too hard to read. Here is an easy to read proposal inspired by your `3b` version:

```
multi_goal_tactics ::= @tactic_list
| {? @tactic_list | } {? @ltac_expr } .. {? | @tactic_list }
```

I think it shows clearly that there are two cases, one base case and one with a central `..`
`tactic_list` is unchanged wrt the previous proposal.

`for_each_goal` sounds like a reasonable name to me.

>    | @ltac_expr

Author: OK, that seems good:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/81510213-0b0f8300-92c5-11ea-819d-473ddc258f62.png)

How about `for_each_tactics` or `for_each_tacs` instead of `tactic_list`?

>    | @ltac_expr

Reviewer 2: Since this is repeated several times, this should be kept rather small. The current version does look OK to me.

>    ltac_expr3 ::= @ltac_expr2

Author: I'll give explicit lists for these but I think the grammar shouldn't change.  `binder_tactic` appears in several places, so it would have been hard to explain in words, whereas each of the others appears in only one place in `ltac_expr*`.

>    ltac_expr3 ::= @ltac_expr2

Reviewer 2: I see the difference but still having two nonterminals for those would help insist on the point that some stuff is not shown in this grammar.

   ltac_expr2 ::= @ltac_expr + {| @ltac_expr2 | @binder_tactic }
   | @ltac_expr || @binder_tactic {| @ltac_expr2 | @binder_tactic }
   | @ltac_expr1
   ltac_expr1 ::= @simple_tactic
   | @tactic_arg
   | @qualid {* @tactic_arg_compat }
   | @ltac_expr0
   tactic_arg_compat ::= @tactic_arg
   | @term
   | ()
   ltac_expr0 ::= ( @ltac_expr )
   | [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]
   | @tactic_atom
   tactic_atom ::= @int
   | @qualid
   | ()

> .. todo PR: I wonder if tactic_expr would be better than ltac_expr?

Author: For `Tactic Notation`, the names would align somewhat better, e.g. tactic_n_ in the table would map to tactic_expr_n_.  My thinking was more that "ltac_expr" suggests defining new tactics, e.g. `Ltac X := ...`, which can be much more complex than simple things like "tac1 ; tac2" or "all: simpl".  I expect people would/should learn the latter two before they look at defining new tactics.

> .. todo PR: I wonder if tactic_expr would be better than ltac_expr?

Reviewer 2: At some point, I want to move the explanation on goal selectors out of the Ltac chapter to the Proof handling chapter where it more properly belongs (as you can see, toplevel selectors are a bit above Ltac when used without `only`). As for `;` people will learn about it from examples: they do not need to read the full Ltac chapter to understand it. The ltac_expr syntax allows to create very complex expressions that one can use directly in proof mode or in a `Ltac :=` definition. So I'm rather on the side of keeping the relation with Ltac clearly highlighted.

> .. todo PR: I wonder if tactic_expr would be better than ltac_expr?

Author: I'll leave as ltac_expr for now.

.. todo PR For the moment, I've left the language constructs like +, || and ; unchanged in the grammar.

>    Not sure what to do with them.  If we just make these indirections I think the grammar no longer

Author: The longer the material associated with a chunk of syntax, the less useful it is to organizing the explanation of the constructs in the order it appears in the grammar--as opposed to grouping by semantic concepts.  This chapter is quite long.  For example, `||` is described next to `tryif`, which is conceptually related.

What do you think about eventually doing one of these?

> We should think about eventually having a cheat sheet for the constructs, perhaps as part of the chapter introduction (use case: I know there's a construct but I can't remember its syntax).  They do show up in the index but they're not so easy to find.  I had thought a little about putting an ltac expression cheat sheet at the top of the tactics index.  Unconventional, but people would see it and remember how to find it.

I suppose we could do some of the indirections by adding a link on the same line as the production.  That would be more python tweaks.

(This concern applies doubly to the terms grammar.)

>    Not sure what to do with them.  If we just make these indirections I think the grammar no longer

Reviewer 2: The tactics chapter itself is too long. I'd avoid adding more material to it for now, and I'd prefer discussing such ideas in a separate issue.

   gives you an overall idea of the concrete grammar without following the hyperlinks for many terms--not so easy
   (e.g. I have a construct and I want to figure out which productions generate it so I can read about them).
   We should think about eventually having a cheat sheet for the constructs, perhaps as part of the
   chapter introduction (use case: I know there's a construct but I can't remember its syntax).  They
   do show up in the index but they're not so easy to find.  I had thought a little about putting
   an ltac expression cheat sheet at the top of the tactics index.  Unconventional, but people would
   see it and remember how to find it.

   OTOH, as you rightly note, they are not really tactics.  Looking for better ideas that we are OK with.

   FWIW removing some the ltac-defined tactics tactics has reduced the grammar to one page, much less
   intimidating.

.. note::

>    Syntactically, most :token:`tactic`\s are :production:`simple_tactic`\s.
>    The documentation also describes the following as :token:`tactic`\s because they can

Reviewer 2: I don't think you need to use a token for tactic:
```suggestion
   Syntactically, most tactics are :production:`simple_tactic`\s.
   The documentation also describes the following as tactics because they can
```

        :n:`((try (repeat (@tactic__1 || @tactic__2)); @tactic__3); [ {+| @tactic } ]); @tactic__4`

.. insertprodn ltac_expr tactic_atom

.. prodn::
   ltac_expr ::= @binder_tactic
   | @ltac_expr4
   binder_tactic ::= fun {+ @name } => @ltac_expr
   | let {? rec } @let_clause {* with @let_clause } in @ltac_expr
   | info @ltac_expr
   let_clause ::= @name := @ltac_expr
   | @ident {+ @name } := @ltac_expr
   ltac_expr4 ::= @ltac_expr3 ; @binder_tactic
   | @ltac_expr3 ; @ltac_expr3
   | @ltac_expr3 ; [ {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

>    | @ltac_expr3 ; [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]

Reviewer 2: For instance, these rules could be extracted as a `ltac_seq` non-terminal.

Author: Sure, of course they can be extracted.  But is that most usable presentation?

   | @ltac_expr3
   multi_goal_tactics ::= {? @ltac_expr } %| @multi_goal_tactics
   | {? @ltac_expr } .. {? %| {*| {? @ltac_expr } } }
   | @ltac_expr
   ltac_expr3 ::= try @ltac_expr3
   | do @int_or_var @ltac_expr3
   | timeout @int_or_var @ltac_expr3
   | time {? @string } @ltac_expr3
   | repeat @ltac_expr3
   | progress @ltac_expr3
   | once @ltac_expr3
   | exactly_once @ltac_expr3
   | infoH @ltac_expr3
   | abstract @ltac_expr2
   | abstract @ltac_expr2 using @ident

>    | only @selector : @ltac_expr3

Reviewer 2: These could maybe be extracted as a `ltac_tactical` or `ltac_combinator` non-terminal. We might also decide to extract only `try`, `do`, `repeat`, `progress`, `once`, `exactly_once` together because they are close from a semantic point of view and it makes sense that they are documented in a single section.

Author: The grouping under these nonterminals is not be obvious if you don't already know the constructs well.

How do you make these constructs easily discoverable without reading the entire chapter?  Or easy to find in the doc; text search in the browser may give a lot of false positives.  Introductions will help but I think indexes are part of solution.

   | @ltac_expr2
   selector ::= {+, @range_selector }
   | [ @ident ]
   range_selector ::= @num - @num
   | @num
   ltac_expr2 ::= @ltac_expr1 + @binder_tactic
   | @ltac_expr1 + @ltac_expr2
   | tryif @ltac_expr then @ltac_expr else @ltac_expr2
   | @ltac_expr1 || @binder_tactic

>    | @ltac_expr1 || @ltac_expr2

Reviewer 2: This could be extracted as a new `ltac_choose` non-terminal.

Author: At some point, not too soon, there should be a way to search for grammar, tactics and commands that include the `||` nonterminal.

Semantics
---------

Types of values
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An |Ltac| value can be a tactic, integer, string or syntactic value.
Syntactic values correspond to certain nonterminal symbols in the grammar,
each of which is a distinct type of value.
Most commonly, the value of an |Ltac| expression is a tactic that can be executed.

While there are a number of constructs that let you combine multiple tactics into

> compound tactics, there are no operations for combining the other types of values.

Reviewer: Not quite true.  You can combine two `constr`s, two `uconstr`s, two `open_constr`s.  You might be able to combine intropatterns as well, and perhaps some of the others.  But indeed this is true for `string` and `integer`.
```suggestion
compound tactics, there are no operations for combining most other types of values.
```

> For example, there's no function to add two integers.  Syntactic values are entered
> with the :token:`syn_value` construct.  Values of all types can be assigned to toplevel

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing to me.  What's the `syn_value` construct?  Do you mean
```suggestion
For example, there's no function to add two integers.  Syntactic values are entered
with a :token:`syn_value` construct.  Values of all types can be assigned to toplevel
```

results can be terms or integers but the final result must be a tactic

> which is then applied to the focused goals.

Reviewer: GitHub won't let me comment on the full paragraph, but I'd suggest something like:
```rst
|Ltac| has two notions of tactics: tactic *expressions* and tactic *values*.
A tactic *expression* is anything the user types in.
A tactic *value* is either a tactic that is ready to be run on the goal (such as the :tacn:`constructor` tactic),
a tactic function (such as `ltac:(fun _ => constructor)`), unit (denoted `()`), or anything in the table of :ref:`Syntactic values`,
such as integers, strings, constrs, etc.
|Ltac| evaluation has two phases: expression evaluation phase, when tactic expressions are evaluated into tactic values,
and the runtime phase, when tactic values are run in the context of goals.
During the expression evaluation phase, the following things happen:
- If the top-level expression is of the form `let name args := body in rest`, then `body` is evaluated in the context of `args` and bound to `name`, after which `rest` is evaluated
- if the top-level expression is any function application of the form `f args`, then `f` is expression-evaluated, then `args` are expression-evaluated from left to right, and `f` is applied to `args`, and the result is expression-evaluated
- if the top-level expression is a `match`, `lazymatch`, or `multimatch`, then the `match` is expression-evaluated *and* the selected branch of the match is *both* expression-evaluated *and run as a tactic on the current goal(s)*.
- If the top-level expression is anything else, then it is returned as-is as a tactic value.
```

This might deserve a couple of examples, and can probably be polished, but it's a first stab.

Author: Initial thoughts:
- "tactic value" as you use it here is confusing.  The obvious meaning would be "a value of type *tactic*", while you describe it as including integers, strings, etc.  It also clashes with the error message "Expression does not evaluate to a tactic." from `integer:(1).`  Maybe best just to refer to these as "values".

- For a given complex Ltac expression, is all of the evaluation phase done before any of the runtime phase is done?  (I'm guessing no)  Or do the phases apply recursively to individual constructs?  Seems like a let inside a match action might have to be recomputed if there are multiple matches for the branch.

- Which of the following, if any, are only part of the evaluation phase?  I think we'd want to be quite clear about this.
  - substitution of matched values into a tactic
  - getting the value generated by "fresh"
  - getting the term generated by the "context" tactic

Reviewer: > * "tactic value" as you use it here is confusing.  The obvious meaning would be "a value of type _tactic_", while you describe it as including integers, strings, etc.  It also clashes with the error message "Expression does not evaluate to a tactic." from `integer:(1).`  Maybe best just to refer to these as "values".

Yes, "values" sounds better.  Or maybe "Ltac values", to make it clear that we're talking about values in the context of Ltac, not in, e.g., the context of metatheory of CiC terms.

> For a given complex Ltac expression, is all of the evaluation phase done before any of the runtime phase is done? (I'm guessing no) Or do the phases apply recursively to individual constructs?

The phases apply recursively.  For example, the *runtime* behavior of sequencing (`;`) is that to *run* `a; b`, you first expression-evaluate `a` to a value, then you *run* that value, then you expression-evaluate `b` to a value, and then you run that value.  This ordering can be observed with the example:
```coq
Goal True.
  (let __ := match goal with _ => idtac 0 end in idtac 1);
    (let __ := match goal with _ => idtac 2 end in idtac 3).
  (* 0 1 2 3 *)
```
This is why prefixing a tactic `idtac; ` delays the expression-evaluation of that tactic.  Note that this is in contrast to function application and tactic notation evaluation, which evaluate all of their arguments first:
```coq
Tactic Notation "seq" tactic3(a) "then" tactic3(b) := a; b.

Goal True.
  seq (let __ := match goal with _ => idtac 0 end in idtac 1)
  then (let __ := match goal with _ => idtac 2 end in idtac 3).
  (* 0 2 1 3 *)
```

> Seems like a let inside a match action might have to be recomputed if there are multiple matches for a branch.

All `match` constructs force eager *running* of their branches, allowing users to use `match` to "inject" runtime behavior into expression-evaluation phase, as I do in the above examples.  So I'm not sure what you mean by "recomputed".

> Which of the following, if any, are only part of the evaluation phase? I think we'd want to be quite clear about this.
>
> - substitution of matched values into a tactic

What do you mean by this?  I think perhaps it's better to model Ltac as being an imperative language with a context, and variables are looked up in the context as needed, rather than thinking of substituting values into a "tactic AST".  So perhaps there are properly three phases: (1) parsing/interpretation of a user-written AST into an unevaluated expression, (2) expression evaluation, (3) running of tactics on goals.  (2) and (3) are interwoven with each other, but not with (1).

> - getting the value generated by "fresh"

Yes, I guess I forgot about this, things like `fresh` and `numgoals` are run/evaluated entirely during expression-evaluation.

> - getting the term generated by the "context" tactic

I wouldn't call `context` a tactic, but a syntactic construct, but, indeed, this too occurs during expression-evaluation.  So does running `eval redexpr in term`.

I believe the full list is: the two non-`info` things in `tactic:binder_tactic` (`fun` and `let`), everything in `tactic:tactic_arg` (which includes `eval ...`, `fresh`, `type_term`, `numgoals`, among others), `match`, `lazymatch`, `multimatch`, substitution/context-lookup of things in `prim:reference` (under `tactic:tactic_expr`), the `LIST0 tactic_arg_compat` (under `tactic:tactic_expr`) which I believe is used for function application / function calling, `( ... )` which is just used for grouping (at level 0 in `tactic:tactic_expr`), `tactic_atom` (`()` and integers and qualids), and the things in `tactic_arg_compat` (which seem to be `tactic_arg`, `Constr.constr`, and `()`).

Author: Maybe we're taking this too far?  Aside from `assert_*`, when is the distinction between evaluation and runtime really important to the user?  Clearly it affects your `"seq"` example, but is it a central point or a lesser detail?  Might be easier to show that example.  Probably safest to suggest users experiment with it to understand the order (i.e. it's not always what you expect) rather than trying to be authoritative.

The text so far doesn't cover a number of Ltac constructs.  It's complicated stating it correctly, e.g. for "If the top-level expression is of the form `let name args := body in rest`, then `body` is evaluated in the context of `args` and bound to `name`, after which `rest` is evaluated", `body` is also run (maybe "execute"/"execution" is clearer than "runs"/"runtime"?).

Reviewer: >  when is the distinction between evaluation and runtime really important to the user?

It's absolutely essential when writing a tactic that should both have side effects and return a constr, integer, ident, etc, and you don't want to cps-convert the tactic.  Consider:
```coq
Ltac cache_term val id :=
  let H := fresh in
  let id := fresh id in
  let ty := type of val in
  let __ := lazymatch goal with
            | _ => simple refine (let H : ty := _ in _);
                   [ transparent_abstract exact val using id | ]
            end in
  let ret := (eval cbv delta [H] in H) in
  let __ := lazymatch goal with _ => clear H end in
  ret.

Goal True.
  let v := cache_term I val in
  idtac v. (* val *)
  Print val. (* val = I
     : True *)
```

> maybe "execute"/"execution" is clearer than "runs"/"runtime"?

Sure.

Author: What is cps-convert?  And in which part of the example is the distinction between evaluation and runtime essential?  On `ret.`?  BTW, AFAIK we don't mention function return values anywhere in the chapter.

Seems like some constructs don't play well with integers.  Is this worth mentioning at all?

```
Goal True /\ False.
let x := tryif idtac then 1 else 2 in idtac x.   (* <tactic closure> *)
let x := match goal with |- _ => 3 | |- False => 4 end in idtac x.  (* 3 *)
let x := split; match goal with |- True => 3 | |- False => 4 end in idtac x.  (* <tactic closure> *)
```

It seems to me that the important point for users in your proposed text is the part about match/lazymatch/multimatch, which would be unexpected, and that the rest is a very standard way to evaluate expressions.  In which case I would only discuss that single point.  WDYT?  Am I mistaken?

Reviewer: > Seems like some constructs don't play well with integers. Is this worth mentioning at all?

This is exactly the difference between expression-evaluation and runtime.  The constructs that play well with integers (also: constrs, uconstrs, etc) are exactly the ones that are evaluated during expression-evaluation.

> It seems to me that the important point for users in your proposed text is the part about match/lazymatch/multimatch, which would be unexpected, and that the rest is a very standard way to evaluate expressions. In which case I would only discuss that single point. WDYT? Am I mistaken?

I think this is one of the points, and the other point to discuss is just that there *are* two separate phases in the first place.

.. todo note that both term_ltac and tactic_arg have this same production.

Substitution
~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. todo next paragraph: we need a better discussion of substitution.
   Looks like that also applies to binder_tactics in some form.
   See https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r422105218

:token:`qualid`\s within |Ltac| expressions are used to represent both terms and
|Ltac| variables.  If the :token:`qualid` corresponds to
an |Ltac| variable or tactic name, |Ltac| substitutes the value before applying
the expression.  Generally it's best to choose distinctive names for |Ltac| variables
that won't clash with term names.  You can use :n:`ltac:(@qualid)` or :n:`(@qualid)`
to control whether a :token:`qualid` is interpreted as, respectively, an |Ltac|
variable or a term.

Value types
~~~~~~~~~~~

Most commonly, the value of an |Ltac| expression is a tactic that can be executed.  While some
constructs generate integers or strings, there are no operations for combining
these, for example there's no function to add two integers.  The following constructs allow creation of
values with types corresponding to various syntactic classes.  Values of all types can be assigned

> to toplevel symbols with the :cmd:`Ltac` command or to local symbols with the :tacn:`let` tactic.

Reviewer: I think the contradiction is that in the distant past, "a term, an integer, and a tactic" were all the types there were.  Now there are many more types, so that semantics section should be updated.

terms in recursive |Ltac| functions may give very slow behavior because
terms must be fully type checked at each step.  In this case, using
an untyped term may avoid most of the repetitive type checking for the term,
improving performance.

   :token:`ident`
      name of a grammar nonterminal listed in the table

   :production:`nonterminal`
      represents syntax described by :token:`nonterminal`.

   .. list-table::
      :header-rows: 1

      * -  Specified :token:`ident`
        - Parsed as
        - Interpreted as
        - as in tactic

      * - ``ident``
        - :token:`ident`
        - a user-specified name
        - :tacn:`intro`

      * - ``string``
        - :token:`string`
        - a string
        -

      * - ``integer``
        - :token:`int`
        - an integer
        -

      * - ``reference``
        - :token:`qualid`
        - a qualified identifier
        -

      * - ``uconstr``
        - :token:`term`
        - an untyped term
        - :tacn:`refine`

      * - ``constr``
        - :token:`term`
        - a term
        - :tacn:`exact`

      * - ``ltac``
        - :token:`ltac_expr`
        - a tactic
        -

> Sequence: ;

Author: All of these similar suggestions would get us from 36 subsections to 26, still too many.  Would require more thought than I'm willing to muster to do it right (like 7 or 10).  We'd probably want to add introductory sentences, etc.  If you want to do that for 8.12 in another PR, that would be fine with me.  I am so done with this PR.

> Sequence: ;

Reviewer: > I am so done with this PR.

I think already the state of the Ltac documentation is much, much better than it was before, and shepherding this PR seems to have been a lot of work.  I'm looking forward to it getting merged too.

results can be terms or integers but the final result must be a tactic
which is then applied to the focused goals.

There is a special case for :tacn:`match goal` expressions of which the clauses
evaluate to tactics. Such expressions can only be used as the end result of
a tactic expression (never as an argument of a non-recursive local

> definition or of an application).

Reviewer: I think this might be documenting the <= 8.4 behavior of tactics?

Author: What do you suggest here?  I have no knowledge about 8.4.

Reviewer: Perhaps just remove it?  Consider the following change in behavior:
```coq
Goal True.
  let f tac := tac; tac in
  f ltac:(match goal with
          | [ |- True ] => idtac "True"
          | [ |- False ] => idtac "False"
          end).
  (* 8.4: Error: Immediate match producing tactics not allowed in local definitions. *)
  (* 8.5 and later: True *)
```
This error message is what this paragraph is talking about, and the error message no longer exists in >= 8.5.

I think also that the paragraph above this paragraph should be rewritten in any case.

Author: @JasonGross I'll drop the paragraph, however I don't know what to change in the preceeding paragraph.

Reviewer: See https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103/files#r432990765 for a suggestion

results can be terms or integers but the final result must be a tactic
which is then applied to the focused goals.

There is a special case for :tacn:`match goal` expressions of which the clauses
evaluate to tactics. Such expressions can only be used as the end result of
a tactic expression (never as argument of a non-recursive local

> definition or of an application).

Reviewer: I think this might be documenting the <= 8.4 behavior of tactics?

   :n:`v__2` is applied to all the goals produced by the prior
   application. Sequence is associative.

   .. todo I don't see the distinction between evaluating an ltac expression
      and applying it--how are they not the same thing?  If different, the
      "Semantics" section above should explain it.
      See https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r422210482

   .. note::

      - If you want :n:`@tactic__2; @tactic__3` to be fully applied to the first
        subgoal generated by :n:`@tactic__1` before applying it to the other
        subgoals, then you should write:

        - :n:`@tactic__1; [> @tactic__2; @tactic__3 .. ]` rather than

        - :n:`@tactic__1; (@tactic__2; @tactic__3)`.

Local application of tactics: [> ... ]
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> .. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]

Author: Sometimes such redundancy is helpful to the user.  In this case, `[> ]` is a no-op, it's not really useful.  I will change.

> .. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]

Reviewer: Huh?  `[ > ]` is not a no-op, it fails if the number of goals is not equal to 1.  It's `[ > .. ]` that's a no-op.

> .. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]

Reviewer 2: In this case, I'd bet that the redundancy would have been confusing to the reader :wink:

> .. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]

Author: Then `[> ]` is a weird exception.  `[> idtac "x"]` only works if there's one goal, `[> idtac "y"; idtac "z" ]` only works if there are 2.  Consistency suggests `[> ]` should work only if there are zero goals.

If that's a really important use case maybe it's worth mentioning in the doc.  Isn't there a construction using `numgoals` that is more obvious?

> In this case, I'd bet that the redundancy would have been confusing to the reader

I disagree.  It should be obvious to any reader that `{? {? foo } }` is the same as `{? foo }`.  Determining whether `for_each_goal`is optional while reading the tactic line requires reading 2 lines of the prodn.  Showing in the tactic is easier to read.  But I'd only do it if we document `[> ]`.

> .. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]

Reviewer 2: You are getting confused. All your examples work only if there are exactly one goal (because there is no `|`).

> .. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]

Reviewer 2: In particular, there is no weird exception.

> .. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]

Author: I had a typo, should have been `[> idtac "x" | idtac "y"].`

Then we need to reword "the construct fails if the number of specified {? @ltac_expr } is not the same as the number of focused goals." with the less aesthetic

"... as the number of "|" plus one."

> .. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]

Reviewer: The sentence as stated is true; you just need to be aware of the fact that `{? @ltac_expr }` is allowed to be empty, so the number of `{? @ltac_expr }` is not the same as the number of `@ltac_expr` in some cases.  Perhaps this is worth noting? Note also that this correspondence breaks down if `..` appears in the construction.

> .. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]

Reviewer: Note also that, e.g., `[ > | | | ]` is valid, and I use this form of the construction sometimes in preference to `numgoals` with `guard`, as it's much shorter (and also more version-independent; I seem to recall `guard` having some weird edge cases around having 0 goals back when it was first introduced).

> .. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]

Reviewer 2: I second Jason that the current formulation is correct and does not need to be changed (as soon as the reader understands that `{? @ltac_expr }` is indeed allowed to be blank).

   :n:`v__2` is applied to all the goals produced by the prior
   application. Sequence is associative.

   .. todo PR I don't see the distinction between evaluating an ltac expression
      and applying it--how are they not the same thing?

Local application of tactics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: [> {? @for_each_goal } ]
   :name: [> ... | ... | ... ] (dispatch)

   .. insertprodn for_each_goal tactic_list

   .. prodn::
      for_each_goal ::= @tactic_list
      | {? @tactic_list %| } {? @ltac_expr } .. {? %| @tactic_list }
      tactic_list ::= {*| {? @ltac_expr } }

   Applies a different :n:`{? @ltac_expr }` to each of the focused goals.  In the first

>    form of :token:`for_each_goal`(without `..`), the construct fails if the number of specified

Reviewer 2: This breaks the build so I'm going to apply the suggestion myself:

```suggestion
   form of :token:`for_each_goal` (without `..`), the construct fails if the number of specified
```

   :n:`v__2` is applied to all the goals produced by the prior
   application. Sequence is associative.

   .. todo PR I don't see the distinction between evaluating an ltac expression

>       and applying it--how are they not the same thing?

Author: Still seems too imprecise.  Is the `match` considered a tactic?  If so, what other Ltac constructs are handled in evaluation rather than application.  Does "tactic" mean simple tactic or a tactic expression?

The language in the "Semantics" section makes an undefined distinction between evaluation and application:

> Tactic expressions can only be applied in the context of a proof. The
evaluation yields either a term, an integer or a tactic.

>       and applying it--how are they not the same thing?

Reviewer 2: > Does "tactic" mean simple tactic or a tactic expression?

I guess it means something in between. Yes we should clarify all of this. But that's definitely out of scope of a PR trying to fix the syntax. In further PRs trying to explain things better, I would involve more people that are experts, but it would be smaller PRs that would be less hard to follow.

>       and applying it--how are they not the same thing?

Author: OK, punt

>       and applying it--how are they not the same thing?

Reviewer: > If so, what other Ltac constructs are handled in evaluation rather than application.

I've explained this on coq-club and in the issue tracker a couple times, and I think some others have explained it as well; here are some relevant posts:
I explain it at length in https://github.com/coq/coq/issues/4732#issuecomment-337542429 (in particular, this explains what happens during tactic expression evaluation time)
See also:
https://sympa.inria.fr/sympa/arc/coq-club/2016-10/msg00057.html
https://sympa.inria.fr/sympa/arc/coq-club/2018-04/msg00092.html
https://github.com/coq/coq/issues/5235#issuecomment-337549681
http://coqhott.gforge.inria.fr/blog/coq-tactic-engine/
@aspiwack 's original explanation is at https://sympa.inria.fr/sympa/arc/coqdev/2014-12/msg00130.html and is quite excellent.

While I'm bringing up ancient history, I wonder if @aspiwack can confirm my guess; in [your email](https://sympa.inria.fr/sympa/arc/coqdev/2014-12/msg00130.html), you say:

> Two of these have been mentioned on this thread: [match] doesn't give the strange "Immediate match producing tactics not allowed in local definitions." error. Instead, it evaluates eagerly like in a cbv language. And [lazymatch] is now more uniform with [match] as it also evaluates its branches eagerly.
> 
> The latter change I've made because: well, first and foremost, I had always thought it was the semantics, so when I had to modify the implementation of lazymatch to use the new tactic API, I just did it that way. In the process of doing so, I discovered how [lazymatch] worked before (see below) in order to try and be lazy and was a tad horrified. It didn't work. Now, there may be a way to make [lazymatch] lazy without these issue, but working ones way around Ltac's interpreter is really hard, and I simply don't know how to do it without rewriting it all (quite a perilous endeavour). Plus, I'm not even sure it is a good idea, I feel it more predictable when the various variants of match behave as uniformly as possible. I may be wrong of course.

You didn't explain why you removed the "Immediate match producing tactics not allowed in local definitions." error. I hypothesized [in this email](https://sympa.inria.fr/sympa/arc/coq-club/2018-04/msg00092.html):

> Historical fact: in Coq <= 8.4, it gave an error message.  "Immediate match producing tactics not allowed in this location" or something.  This error message was removed in Coq 8.5, when Ltac switched to the new proof engine.
> 
> My hypothesis is that the original author of Ltac wanted a language that could both run tactics and produce terms, implemented it in the first way they thought of, noticed that this sort of thing was weird and unintuitive, and added an error message forbidding it.  This quirk of implementation, that `match` runs its branches doing tactic _expression_ evaluation, was nearly unobservable (you could only notice it by nesting match in lazymatch and noticing that you could get an unexpected failure level).
> Many years later, when the devs rewrote the tactic engine to be saner, they had no collective recollection of why Ltac was the way it was (and, after all, this is all merely my guessing based on the feel of Ltac as a language), and saw no reason to keep the error message, so they permitted this behavior.  They could not change the fact that match runs early, though, because that would break almost every tactic that constructs a term.

I'm curious @aspiwack if you recall whether or not my hypothesis is correct.

>       and applying it--how are they not the same thing?

Reviewer: > the distinction between evaluating an ltac expression and applying it

Btw, I think "applying" is a misleading description of the thing that is not evaluation.  I would call it "running" or "execution" of the tactic.  (Tactic expression evaluation already has a notion of application which is not this one, namely, I can write `let f _ := idtac in f ()` and `f ()` is an application of `f` to `()` which happens during tactic expression evaluation, whereas `idtac` is "applied" to the current goal during execution/runtime.)

>       and applying it--how are they not the same thing?

Author: Thanks for the background--I put a link in the rst file as a todo.

BTW, do you happen to know how multimatch differs from match and lazymatch?  I couldn't find an example, let alone explain.

>       and applying it--how are they not the same thing?

Reviewer 3: > I'm curious @aspiwack if you recall whether or not my hypothesis is correct.

I can't say that I fully remember all of this to be honest. But I think that the eager match was simply not possible in the old tactic model. Essentially you had to build a tree of tactic and execute it in one step. Or maybe it would have been possible, but contrived.

The difficulty with Ltac, was that it was rather difficult to fit in an ML-like semantics with the tools of the Milner-style tactic engine. But the new tactic engine was simply a monad. Monads are almost just another word for an ML-like semantics. So suddenly some operations which were barely thinkable became natural.

And I assume that this is what motivated this particular change. Does it make sense?

Local application of tactics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: [> {? @multi_goal_tactics } ]
   :name: [> ... | ... | ... ] (dispatch)

   Applies a different :n:`{? @ltac_expr }` to each of the focused goals.  If
   `..` is not specified, this construct will fail if the number of specified items
   is not the same as the number of focused goals.  Omitting an :n:`@ltac_expr`
   leaves the corresponding goal unchanged.

   :n:`[> {*| {? @ltac_expr__i } } | {? @ltac_expr } .. | {*| {? @ltac_expr__j } } ]``

>       If specified, :n:`@ltac_expr` is applied to each goal coming after those

Author: "If specified" refers to @ltac_expr.  That is not clear?

>       If specified, :n:`@ltac_expr` is applied to each goal coming after those

Reviewer 2: Ah! OK, that does make sense now. Yes, this can probably be left as is.

        - a tactic
        -

:n:`ltac:(@ltac_expr)` can be used to indicate that the parenthesized item

> should be interpreted as a tactic and not as a term.  The constructs can also
> be used to pass parameters to OCaml code.  (While all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should be interpreted as a tactic and not as a term.  The constructs can also
be used to pass parameters to tactics written in OCaml.  (While all
```
(Otherwise it sounds like you can inject OCaml code directly in a .v file)

of the :token:`syn_value`\s can appear at the beginning of an :token:`ltac_expr`,
the others are not useful because they will not evaluate to tactics.)

:n:`uconstr : ( @term )` can be used to build untyped terms.

> Terms built in |Ltac| are well-typed by default.  Building large

Reviewer: Have you already mentioned `constr:` at this point?  If not, it seems like you should move the constr discussion above this, or insert it, because otherwise "by default" is confusing.

Author: The sentence is in the second paragraph after this table that mentions `constr:`.  Is that sufficient?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/83958605-9595c480-a828-11ea-9324-cffe65c10005.png)

Reviewer: I think we want a tiny bit more than that.  I think something like
```suggestion
:n:`uconstr : ( @term )` can be used to build untyped terms.
Terms built in |Ltac| are well-typed by default, using :n:`constr : ( @term )`.  Building large
```
would be sufficient.

Reviewer: Though maybe it's fine as-is, and "default" means "when used as arguments to Ltac functions"

Author: I think I'll leave it as-is.  I think we don't have a good writeup on typechecking yet, so harder to make this understandable.  Nor do I know that much about typechecking, e.g. when it runs.  I'll leave a todo in the file, though.

   `all`
      Selects all focused goals.

   `!`
      If exactly one goal is in focus, apply :token:`ltac_expr` to it.
      Otherwise the tactic fails.

   `par`
      Applies :n:`@ltac_expr` to all focused goals in parallel.
      The number of workers can be controlled via the command line option
      :n:`-async-proofs-tac-j @num` to specify the desired number of workers.
      Limitations: ``par:`` only works on goals that don't contain existential
      variables.  :n:`@ltac_expr` must either solve the goal completely or do
      nothing (i.e. it cannot make some progress).

   .. todo toplevel_selector is also used in tactic_mode ::= OPT ( toplevel_selector ":" ) "{"
      but syntactically doesn't allow par.  Not sure whether to mention the limitation here
      or wherever we explain the tactic mode production.

Selectors can also be used nested within a tactic expression with the
:tacn:`only` tactic:

.. tacn:: only @selector : @ltac_expr3

   .. insertprodn selector range_selector

   .. prodn::
      selector ::= {+, @range_selector }
      | [ @ident ]
      range_selector ::= @num - @num
      | @num

   Applies :token:`ltac_expr3` to the selected goals.

>    :tacn:`only` is an :token:`ltac_expr3`.

Author: It's fine.  I use the same phrasing elsewhere.

   :n:`{+, @range_selector }`
      The selected goals are the union of the specified :token:`range_selector`\s.

   :n:`[ @ident ]`
      Limits the application of :token:`ltac_expr3` to the goal previously named :token:`ident`
      by the user (see :ref:`existential-variables`).

   :n:`@num__1 - @num__2`
      Selects the goals :n:`@num__1` through :n:`@num__2`, inclusive.

   :n:`@num`
      Selects a single goal.

.. exn:: No such goal.
   :name: No such goal. (Goal selector)
   :undocumented:

.. TODO change error message index entry

Do loop
~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: do @int_or_var @ltac_expr3
   :name: do

   The do loop repeats a tactic :token:`num` times:

   :n:`@ltac_expr` is evaluated to ``v`` which must be a tactic value. This tactic
   value ``v`` is applied :token:`num` times. Supposing :token:`num` > 1, after the
   first application of ``v``, ``v`` is applied, at least once, to the generated
   subgoals and so on. It fails if the application of ``v`` fails before :token:`num`
   applications have been completed.

>    :tacn:`do` is an :token:`ltac_expr3`.

Reviewer 2: If you do decide to apply the previous suggestion of referring to `l3_tactics`, then this and the rest of such sentences should be modified as well.

.. todo: mention this applies to Print commands and the Info command

Normally tactic expressions are applied only to the current goal.  Goal
selectors provide a way to apply a tactic expression to another goal or multiple

> goals.

Reviewer 2: This looks good but would benefit from additionally referring to the `Default Goal Selector` option.

   .. prodn::
      toplevel_selector ::= @selector
      | all
      | !
      | par

   Applies :token:`ltac_expr` to the selected goals.  It can only be used at the top
   level of a tactic expression; it cannot be used within a tactic expression.

   .. todo why shouldn't "all" and "!" be accepted anywhere a @selector is accepted?
      It would be simpler to explain.

   `all`
      Selects all focused goals.

   `!`
      If exactly one goal is in focus, apply :token:`ltac_expr` to it.
      Otherwise the tactic fails.

   `par`
      Applies :n:`@ltac_expr` to all focused goals in parallel.
      The number of workers can be controlled via the command line option
      :n:`-async-proofs-tac-j @num` to specify the desired number of workers.
      Limitations: ``par:`` only works on goals that don't contain existential
      variables.  :n:`@ltac_expr` must either solve the goal completely or do
      nothing (i.e. it cannot make some progress).

   .. todo PR toplevel_selector is also used in tactic_mode ::= OPT ( toplevel_selector ":" ) "{"
      but syntactically doesn't allow par.  Not sure whether to mention the limitation here

>       or wherever we explain the tactic mode production.

Reviewer 2: Not sure. `par` is a bit of an odd case.

> .. todo PR maybe put toplevel_selector description after "only" selector?

Reviewer 2: No, it looks good like this.

Selectors can also be used nested within a tactic expression with the
:tacn:`only` tactic:

.. tacn:: only @selector : @ltac_expr3

   .. insertprodn selector range_selector

   .. prodn::
      selector ::= {+, @range_selector }
      | [ @ident ]
      range_selector ::= @num - @num
      | @num

   Applies :token:`ltac_expr3` to the selected goals.

   :tacn:`only` is an :token:`ltac_expr3`.

   :n:`{+, @range_selector }`
      The selected goals are the union of the specified :token:`range_selector`\s.

   :n:`[ @ident ]`
      Limits the application of :token:`ltac_expr3` to the goal previously named :token:`ident`
      by the user (see :ref:`existential-variables`).

   :n:`@num__1 - @num__2`
      Selects the goals :n:`@num__1` through :n:`@num__2`, inclusive.

   :n:`@num`
      Selects a single goal.

.. exn:: No such goal.
   :name: No such goal. (Goal selector)
   :undocumented:

.. TODO change error message index entry

Do loop
~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: do @int_or_var @ltac_expr3
   :name: do

>    The do loop that repeats a tactic :token:`num` times:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The do loop repeats a tactic :token:`num` times:
```

   :n:`@ltac_expr` is evaluated to ``v`` which must be a tactic value. This tactic
   value ``v`` is applied :token:`num` times. Supposing :token:`num` > 1, after the
   first application of ``v``, ``v`` is applied, at least once, to the generated

>    subgoals and so on. It fails if the application of ``v`` fails before the num

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   subgoals and so on. It fails if the application of ``v`` fails before the :token:`num`
```

   applications have been completed.

   :tacn:`do` is an :token:`ltac_expr3`.

Repeat loop
~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: repeat @ltac_expr3
   :name: repeat

>    The repeat loop repeats a tactic until it faile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The repeat loop repeats a tactic until it fails.
```

        - a tactic
        -

Sequence: ;
~~~~~~~~~~~

A sequence is an expression of the following form:

.. tacn:: @ltac_expr3__1 ; {| @ltac_expr3__2 | @binder_tactic }
   :name: ltac-seq

   The expression :n:`@ltac_expr3__1` is evaluated to :n:`v__1`, which must be
   a tactic value. The tactic :n:`v__1` is applied to the current goals,

>    possibly producing more goals. Then :n:`@ltac_expr3__2` is evaluated to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   possibly producing more goals. Then :n:`@ltac_expr3__2` (or :n:`@binder_tactic`) is evaluated to
```

to control whether a :token:`name` is interpreted as, respectively, an |Ltac|
variable or a term.

Note that values from toplevel symbols, unlike locally-defined symbols, are

> substituted only when they appear at the beginning of an :token:`ltac_expr`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
substituted only when they appear at the beginning of an :token:`ltac_expr` or :token:`tactic_arg`:
```
I'm a little bit confused here.  It is also the case that global names are substituted when given as arguments to Ltac functions, as in
```coq
Ltac n := match goal with _ => idtac "n call" end.
Ltac foo _ := idtac "foo call".
Ltac foo_n := foo n.

Goal True.
  foo_n.
(* n call
foo call *)
```
I don't entirely see how to match this up with the grammar in a way that's precise and accurate, but I think the suggestion I make in this comment is enough.

Author: Good point.  `idtac n` is an `l1_tactic` in the grammar, not a `qualid {+ tac_arg }`.  So it makes some sense.  Even if it's not precise I think the example alerts readers that things may not be totally consistent.

Author: > Linter complains about trailing whitespace.

That's on one of the earlier commits.  It should go away when I squash.

> Btw, there's still some text using `@tactic`, which I don't see defined anywhere:

I think I'll fix that later, it shouldn't cause much confusion.  There are a ton in the rsts that haven't been updated.

   level of the exception is positive, then the exception is re-raised with its
   level decremented.

   :tacn:`try` is an :token:`ltac_expr3`.

Detecting progress
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We can check if a tactic made progress with:

.. tacn:: progress @ltac_expr3
   :name: progress

>    :n:`@ltac_expr` is evaluated to v which must be a tactic value. The tactic value ``v``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :n:`@ltac_expr` is evaluated to ``v`` which must be a tactic value. The tactic value ``v``
```

   :tacn:`first` :n:`[@ltac_expr__1 | ... | @ltac_expr__n]` applies :n:`v__1` in each
   focused goal independently and stops if it succeeds; otherwise it
   tries to apply :n:`v__2` and so on. It fails when there is no
   applicable tactic. In other words,
   :tacn:`first` :n:`[@ltac_expr__1 | ... | @ltac_expr__n]` behaves, in each goal, as the first
   :n:`v__i` to have *at least* one success.

   :tacn:`first` is an :token:`ltac_expr1`.

   .. exn:: No applicable tactic.
      :undocumented:

   .. todo the following is not accepted as a regular tactic but it does seem to do something
      see https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r422249862.
      Probably the same thing as for the :tacv:`solve` below.
      The code is in Coretactics.initial_tacticals

   .. tacv:: first @ltac_expr

      This is an |Ltac| alias that gives a primitive access to the first
      tactical as an |Ltac| definition without going through a parsing rule. It
      expects to be given a list of tactics through a :cmd:`Tactic Notation` command,
      permitting notations with the following form to be written:

      .. example::

         .. coqtop:: in

>             Tactic Notation "foo" tactic_list(tacs) := first tacs.

Reviewer 2: This example makes me realize that we should really find a better name for the `tactic_list` we introduced. The best alternative name I could find is: `goal_tactics`.

Checking for failure: assert_fails
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Coq provides a derived tactic to check that a tactic *fails*:

.. tacn:: assert_fails @ltac_expr3
   :name: assert_fails

   If :n:`@ltac_expr3` fails, the proof state is unchanged and no message is printed.
   If :n:`@ltac_expr3` unexpectedly has at least one success, the tactic performs
   a :tacn:`gfail` :n:`0`, printing the following message:

   .. exn:: Tactic failure: <tactic closure> succeeds.
      :undocumented:

Checking for success: assert_succeeds
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Coq provides a derived tactic to check that a tactic has *at least one*
success:

.. tacn:: assert_succeeds @ltac_expr3
   :name: assert_succeeds

   If :n:`@ltac_expr3` has at least one success, the proof state is unchanged and
   no message is printed.  If :n:`@ltac_expr3` fails, the tactic performs
   a :tacn:`gfail` :n:`0`, printing the following message:

   .. exn:: Tactic failure: <tactic closure> fails.
      :undocumented:

Solving
~~~~~~~

We may consider the first to solve (i.e. which generates no subgoal)
among a panel of tactics:

.. tacn:: solve [ {*| @ltac_expr } ]
   :name: solve

>    The :n:`@ltac_expr__i` are evaluated to :n:`v__i` and :n:`v__i` must be

Reviewer 2: Should there be a `__i` on the `tacn` line?

   tactic values, for i = 1, ..., n. If n > 1,
   :tacn:`solve` :n:`[@ltac_expr__1 | ... | @ltac_expr__n]` applies :n:`v__1` to
   each goal independently and stops if it succeeds; otherwise it tries to
   apply :n:`v__2` and so on. It fails if there is no solving tactic.

   :tacn:`solve` is an :token:`l1_tactic`.

>    .. exn:: Cannot solve the goal.

Reviewer 2: It looks like the actual error message is `No applicable tactic.`

Author: That message is already documented so it can't be repeated here.

Reviewer 2: Right. But you could remove this incorrect one. And you could also refer the already documented message as is done here: https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/master/doc/sphinx/language/core/basic.rst#attributes (except that this example is referring to a warning). But that's up to you of course!

      :undocumented:

   .. todo see the note above at :tacv:`first`

   .. tacv:: solve @ltac_expr

      This is an |Ltac| alias that gives a primitive access to the :tacn:`solve`
      tactic. See the :tacn:`first` tactic for more information.

Print/identity tactic: idtac
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: idtac {* {| @ident | @string | @int } }
   :name: idtac

   Leaves the proof unchanged and prints the given tokens. Strings and integers are printed
   literally. If :token:`ident` is an |Ltac| variable, its contents are printed; if not, it
   is an error.

   :tacn:`idtac` is an :token:`l1_tactic`.

Failing
~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: {| fail | gfail } {? @int_or_var } {* {| @ident | @string | @int } }
   :name: fail; gfail

   :tacn:`fail` is the always-failing tactic: it does not solve any
   goal. It is useful for defining other tactics since it can be caught by
   :tacn:`try`, :tacn:`repeat`, :tacn:`match goal`, or the branching tacticals.

   :tacn:`gfail` fails even when used after :n:`;` and there are no goals left.
   Similarly, :tacn:`gfail` fails even when used after ``all:`` and there are no
   goals left.

>    :tacn:`fail` and :tacn:`gfail` are :token:`ltac_expr1`\s.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :tacn:`fail` and :tacn:`gfail` are :token:`l1_tactic`\s.
```

   Branching is left-associative.

First tactic to succeed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Backtracking branching may be too expensive. We can restrict
backtracking to local, left biased branching and use the first
tactic that succeeds from a list of tactics:

.. tacn:: first [ {*| @ltac_expr } ]
   :name: first

   The :n:`@ltac_expr__i` are evaluated to :n:`v__i` and :n:`v__i` must be
   tactic values for i = 1, ..., n. Supposing n > 1,
   :tacn:`first` :n:`[@ltac_expr__1 | ... | @ltac_expr__n]` applies :n:`v__1` in each
   focused goal independently and stops if it succeeds; otherwise it
   tries to apply :n:`v__2` and so on. It fails when there is no
   applicable tactic. In other words,
   :tacn:`first` :n:`[@ltac_expr__1 | ... | @ltac_expr__n]` behaves, in each goal, as the first
   :n:`v__i` to have *at least* one success.

   :tacn:`first` is an :token:`ltac_expr1`.

   .. exn:: No applicable tactic.
      :undocumented:

>    .. todo PR I couldn't find an ltac definition for the following.  Is it still supported?

Reviewer 2: It was introduced in #676. I stopped investigating at this point, but it should be possible to determine if this still exists or not.

Reviewer 2: For the record, it is still supported indeed, as shown by the example displayed below. And contrary to what the description seemed to suggest, it is not defined as an Ltac definition in a `.v` file.

Author: It doesn't behave like normal tactics:

```
Ltac Y := first idtac.  (* accepted *)
first [idtac].  (* accepted *)
first idtac.  (* Expected a list *)
Y.  (* Expected a list *)
```

We can come back to this later.

Reviewer 2: Yep, I don't really understand this.

   if it fails, it fails like :n:`v__2`). Branching is left-associative.

Generalized biased branching: tryif
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: tryif @ltac_expr__if then @ltac_expr__then else @ltac_expr2__else
   :name: tryif

   is a generalization of the biased-branching tactics above. The
   expression :n:`@ltac_expr__if` is evaluated to :n:`v__if`, which is then
   applied to each subgoal independently. For each goal where :n:`v__if`
   succeeds at least once, :n:`@ltac_expr__then` is evaluated to :n:`v__then` which
   is then applied collectively to the generated subgoals. The :n:`v__then`
   tactic can trigger backtracking points in :n:`v__if`: where :n:`v__if`
   succeeds at least once,
   :n:`tryif @ltac_expr__if then @ltac_expr__then else @ltac_expr__else` is equivalent to
   :n:`v__if; v__then`. In each of the goals where :n:`v__if` does not succeed at least
   once, :n:`@ltac_expr__else` is evaluated in :n:`v__else` which is is then applied to the
   goal.

   :tacn:`tryif` is an :token:`ltac_expr2`.

Soft cut
~~~~~~~~

.. todo PR Would like a different subsection title above, but I have trouble distinguishing

>    once and exactly_once.

Reviewer 2: ```coq
Goal True \/ False.
(* The following tactic has two successes but we stop at the first one. *)
right + left. (* we end up having to prove False *)
Restart.
(* This time we complete the proof because easy makes the first success
 * of [right + left] end up in a failure so that we try the second one. *)
right + left; easy.
Restart.
(* The following tactic has only one success. *)
once (right + left).
Restart.
(* Therefore, this does not work anymore. *)
Fail once (right + left); easy.
(* Since [right + left] has two successes, the following fails. *)
Fail exactly_once (right + left).
```

So the two have a quite different goal (one is to prevent the backtracking---cut---, the other is to check the behavior of the tactic---but to do that you need to explore all backtracking points: much more expensive!).

Author: The chapter needs an explanation of backtracking.  Maybe that's only a sentence or two.  I'll leave the todo for later.

   :tacn:`exactly_once` :n:`@ltac_expr3` succeeds like ``v``. If ``v`` has two or more
   successes, :tacn:`exactly_once` :n:`@ltac_expr3` fails.

   :tacn:`exactly_once` is an :token:`ltac_expr3`.

   .. warning::

      The experimental status of this tactic pertains to the fact if ``v``
      has side effects, they may occur in an unpredictable way. Indeed,
      normally ``v`` would only be executed up to the first success until
      backtracking is needed, however :tacn:`exactly_once` needs to look ahead to see
      whether a second success exists, and may run further effects
      immediately.

   .. exn:: This tactic has more than one success.
      :undocumented:

Checking for failure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Coq provides a derived tactic to check that a tactic *fails*:

.. tacn:: assert_fails @ltac_expr3
   :name: assert_fails

   Behaves like :tacn:`idtac` if :n:`@ltac_expr3` fails, and
   behaves like :tacn:`fail` :n:`0 @ltac_expr3 "succeeds"` if :n:`@ltac_expr`
   has at least one success.

   .. todo PR the examples for assert_fails and assert_succeeds seem incorrect;
      fail can only take an ident rather than an ltac_expr3.  Also shouldn't have

>       a printable string; IIUC that's not equivalent to assert_* behavior.

Reviewer 2: Was probably meant to mean that it prints the tactic name as part of the error message (as a string). But I don't see why it is so important to explain precisely what the error message is.

Author: Will leave it for later

Reviewer: Indeed, it's not so important to explain what the error message is, and it's fine to just say that it fails when the argument has at least one success.

Reviewer: (And I think my hope was that it would eventually print the tactic name as part of the error message, but right now I think it ends up just printing the literal string "<tactic expression> succeeds" (or something like that).

Checking for success
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Coq provides a derived tactic to check that a tactic has *at least one*
success:

.. tacn:: assert_succeeds @ltac_expr3
   :name: assert_succeeds

   Behaves like
   :tacn:`tryif` :n:`(` :tacn:`assert_fails` :n:`@ltac_expr3) then` :tacn:`fail` :n:`0 @ltac_expr3 "fails" else` :tacn:`idtac`.

Solving
~~~~~~~

We may consider the first to solve (i.e. which generates no subgoal)
among a panel of tactics:

.. tacn:: solve [ {*| @ltac_expr } ]
   :name: solve

   The :n:`@ltac_expr__i` are evaluated to :n:`v__i` and :n:`v__i` must be
   tactic values, for i = 1, ..., n. If n > 1,
   :tacn:`solve` :n:`[@ltac_expr__1 | ... | @ltac_expr__n]` applies :n:`v__1` to
   each goal independently and stops if it succeeds; otherwise it tries to
   apply :n:`v__2` and so on. It fails if there is no solving tactic.

   :tacn:`solve` is an :token:`ltac_expr1`.

   .. exn:: Cannot solve the goal.
      :undocumented:

>    .. todo PR I couldn't find an ltac definition for the following.  Is it still supported?

Reviewer 2: Same answer than above (this comes from #676).

   Similarly, :tacn:`gfail` fails even when used after ``all:`` and there are no
   goals left.

   :tacn:`fail` and :tacn:`gfail` are :token:`ltac_expr1`\s.

   See the example for a comparison of the two constructs.

   Note that if Coq terms have to be
   printed as part of the failure, term construction always forces the
   tactic into the goals, meaning that if there are no goals when it is
   evaluated, a tactic call like :tacn:`let` :n:`x := H in` :tacn:`fail` `0 x` will succeed.

   :n:`@int_or_var`
      The failure level. If no level is specified, it defaults to 0.
      The level is used by :tacn:`try`, :tacn:`repeat`, :tacn:`match goal` and the branching
      tacticals. If 0, it makes :tacn:`match goal` consider the next clause
      (backtracking). If nonzero, the current :tacn:`match goal` block, :tacn:`try`,
      :tacn:`repeat`, or branching command is aborted and the level is decremented. In
      the case of :n:`+`, a nonzero level skips the first backtrack point, even if
      the call to :tacn:`fail` :n:`@num` is not enclosed in a :n:`+` construct,
      respecting the algebraic identity.

   :n:`{* {| @ident | @string | @int } }`

>       The given tokens are used for printing the failure message.

Reviewer 2: Should make specific that `ident` represent Ltac variables. And will raise `@ident not found` if the Ltac variable is undefined. Maybe worth improving the description of this `ident` in the `idtac` description too.

   level of the exception is positive, then the exception is re-raised with its
   level decremented.

   :tacn:`try` is an :token:`l3_tactic`.

Detecting progress
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We can check if a tactic made progress with:

.. tacn:: progress @ltac_expr3
   :name: progress

   :n:`@ltac_expr` is evaluated to ``v`` which must be a tactic value. The tactic value ``v``
   is applied to each focused subgoal independently. If the application of ``v``
   to one of the focused subgoal produced subgoals equal to the initial
   goals (up to syntactical equality), then an error of level 0 is raised.

   :tacn:`progress` is an :token:`l3_tactic`.

   .. exn:: Failed to progress.
      :undocumented:

> Branching and backtracking

Reviewer: Probably also `exactly_once`?  (Is this a variant of `once`?)

> Branching and backtracking

Reviewer 2: I am not sure one should see it as a variant of `once` or rather in the same category as `assert_fail` and `assert_succeed`.

prior backtracking point with the next successful alternative and repeats the tactics after
the backtracking point.  When a backtracking point has
no more successful alternatives, evaluation continues from the next prior backtracking point.
If there are no more prior backtracking points, the overall tactic fails.

Thus, backtracking tactics can have multiple successes.  Non-backtracking constructs that appear
after a backtracking point are reprocessed after backtracking, as in the example
:ref:`here<match_vs_multimatch_ex>`, in which
the :tacn:`;<ltac-seq>` construct is reprocessed after backtracking.  When a backtracking construct is within
a non-backtracking construct, the latter uses the :gdef:`first success`.  Backtracking to
a point within a non-backtracking construct won't change the branch that was selected by the
non-backtracking construct.

The :tacn:`once` tactic stops further backtracking to backtracking points within that tactic.

eval vs execution (also out of order)

Branching with backtracking: +
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We can branch with backtracking with the following structure:

> .. tacn:: @ltac_expr1 + {| @ltac_expr2 | @binder_tactic }

Reviewer: Why are the `ltac_expr`s here not subscripted?

Author: Because that's the definition of the production.  Since the names different, subscripts are not needed.  (Subscripts are more work to maintain when the grammar changes, too.)

```
ltac_expr2: [
| ltac_expr1 "+" [ ltac_expr2 | binder_tactic ]
```

   :name: + (backtracking branching)

>    :n:`@ltac_expr1` and :n:`@ltac_expr2` are evaluated to :n:`v__1` and

Reviewer: This change seems wrong?

Author: Same thing.  That's how "+" is defined in the grammar so no subscripts needed.

   :n:`v__2`  respectively, which must be tactic values. The tactic value :n:`v__1` is applied to
   each focused goal independently and if it fails or a later tactic fails, then

>    the proof backtracks to the current goal and :n:`v__2` is applied.

Reviewer: This is not technically accurate; `ltac_expr2` is only evaluated to a value after backtracking.  For example, the following only poses `I` once:
```coq
Goal True.
  (let __ := match goal with _ => pose I end in idtac)
  + (let __ := match goal with _ => pose I end in idtac).
```

Author: Huh?  How does that reconcile with this?

```
Goal True.
idtac "hi" + fresh "h".

(* error: Tactic expected. *)
```
```

Reviewer: That is a parse error, not an evaluation error.  It also shows up in
```coq
Goal True.
  idtac "hi" + (idtac; fresh "h").
```
and, more tellingly, on
```coq
Ltac foo := idtac "hi" + fresh "h".
```
where no evaluation is done.

Author: I wouldn't call that a parser error.  It happens after parsing succeeds.  Furthermore the message is poorly worded.  It should say something like "This subexpression must return a tactic value".

For example:

```
Ltac foo := idtac "hi" + (fresh "h") + ?.

(* Syntax error: [tactic:binder_tactic] or [tactic:tactic_expr] expected after '+' (in [tactic:tactic_expr]). *)
```

I'll take your word on the original point here.

Reviewer: You're right, it's not a parsing error, but an internalization error.  (I guess this is the step after parsing, when the parsed object turns into a tactic AST or something?)
https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/9c26e583668827bff5159e7671c406ace8b2f3ae/plugins/ltac/tacintern.ml#L35-L36
which is called only at
https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/9c26e583668827bff5159e7671c406ace8b2f3ae/plugins/ltac/tacintern.ml#L689-L695

   (To prevent evaluation of further alternatives, use :tacn:`first` instead.)

   Tactics can be seen as having several successes. When a tactic fails it
   asks for more successes of the prior tactics.
   :n:`@ltac_expr1 + @ltac_expr2` has all the successes of :n:`v__1` followed by all the
   successes of :n:`v__2`. Algebraically,
   :n:`(@ltac_expr1 + @ltac_expr2); @ltac_expr3 = (@ltac_expr1; @ltac_expr__3) + (@ltac_expr2; @ltac_expr3)`.

>    Branching is left-associative.

Reviewer: Do we want the example of how it's not fully associative with failure levels?

Author: Sure, hopefully short and easy to understand.  BTW, is there anywhere where right vs left associativity matters to users?  I've not run across a place but I haven't taken a thorough look.

Reviewer: Again, this PR discussion is getting too big to navigate.  I had to download all the comments via the API and search though them on the command line to find the example.  It's at https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r432900017 : 
```coq
Goal True.
  Fail (fail 2 + idtac) + idtac. (* Tactic failure. *)
  Fail fail 2 + (idtac + idtac). (* Tactic failure (level 1). *)
```
As far as I can tell, this is the only place where associativity of `+` shows up in a user-visible way, and I've literally never encountered this case in real code.  (It's very, very rare to mix failure levels with `+`, because they're created to solve overlapping but distinct problems.)  (Left vs right associativity matters a lot more for other constructs, such as `; [ ... ]` in Ltac and `::` in Gallina (list cons).)

Author: > Again, this PR discussion is getting too big to navigate.

Yup.  I think we're almost done, though.  To view everything, I search in the browser for "hidden " and expand all those, then search for "resolve ".  Or I expand all the notification emails in Gmail, do a text search in the browser for what I want and click on the GitHub link below the relevant message to get to the exact spot.

.. tacn:: @ltac_expr1 + {| @ltac_expr2 | @binder_tactic }
   :name: + (backtracking branching)

   Evaluates and applies :n:`@ltac_expr1` to each focused goal independently.  If it fails
   (i.e. there is no initial success), then evaluates and applies the right-hand side.  If the
   right-hand side fails, the construct fails.

   If :n:`ltac_expr1` has an initial success and a subsequent tactic (outside the `+` construct)
   fails, |Ltac| backtracks and selects the next success for :n:`ltac_expr1`.  If there are
   no more successes, then `+` similarly evaluates and applies (and backtracks in) the right-hand side.
   To prevent evaluation of further alternatives after an initial success for a tactic, use :tacn:`first` instead.

   `+` is left-associative.

   In all cases, :n:`(@ltac_expr__1 + @ltac_expr__2); @ltac_expr__3` is equivalent to
   :n:`(@ltac_expr__1; @ltac_expr__3) + (@ltac_expr__2; @ltac_expr__3)`.

   Additionally, in most cases, :n:`(@ltac_expr__1 + @ltac_expr__2) + @ltac_expr__3` is
   equivalent to :n:`@ltac_expr__1 + (@ltac_expr__2 + @ltac_expr__3)`.
   Here's an example where the behavior differs slightly:

>    .. coqtop:: reset all
> 
>       Goal True.
>       Fail (fail 2 + idtac) + idtac.
>       Fail fail 2 + (idtac + idtac).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. coqtop:: reset none

      Goal True.

   .. coqtop:: all

      Fail (fail 2 + idtac) + idtac.
      Fail fail 2 + (idtac + idtac).
```

No need to display the goal

   See the example for a comparison of the two constructs.

   Note that if Coq terms have to be
   printed as part of the failure, term construction always forces the
   tactic into the goals, meaning that if there are no goals when it is
   evaluated, a tactic call like :tacn:`let` :n:`x := H in` :tacn:`fail` `0 x` will succeed.

   :n:`@int_or_var`
      The failure level. If no level is specified, it defaults to 0.
      The level is used by :tacn:`try`, :tacn:`repeat`, :tacn:`match goal` and the branching
      tacticals. If 0, it makes :tacn:`match goal` consider the next clause
      (backtracking). If nonzero, the current :tacn:`match goal` block, :tacn:`try`,
      :tacn:`repeat`, or branching command is aborted and the level is decremented. In
      the case of :n:`+`, a nonzero level skips the first backtrack point, even if
      the call to :tacn:`fail` :n:`@num` is not enclosed in a :n:`+` construct,
      respecting the algebraic identity.

   :n:`{* {| @ident | @string | @int } }`
      The given tokens are used for printing the failure message.  If :token:`ident`
      is an |Ltac| variable, its contents are printed; if not, it is an error.

>    .. exn:: Tactic Failure message (level @num).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. exn:: Tactic failure message (level @num).
```

.. tacn:: @ltac_expr1 + {| @ltac_expr2 | @binder_tactic }
   :name: + (backtracking branching)

>    Evaluates and applies :n:`@ltac_expr1` to each focused goal independently.  If it fails
>    (i.e. there is no initial success), then evaluate and apply the right-hand side.  If the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Evaluate and apply :n:`@ltac_expr1` to each focused goal independently.  If it fails
   (i.e. there is no initial success), then evaluate and apply the right-hand side.  If the
```
or
```suggestion
   Evaluates and applies :n:`@ltac_expr1` to each focused goal independently.  If it fails
   (i.e. there is no initial success), then evaluates and applies the right-hand side.  If the
```

   right-hand side fails, the construct fails.

   If :n:`ltac_expr1` has an initial success and a subsequent tactic (outside the `+` construct)
   fails, |Ltac| backtracks and selects the next success for :n:`ltac_expr1`.  If there are
   no more successes, then `+` similarly evaluates and applies (and backtracks in) the right-hand side.
   To prevent evaluation of further alternatives after an initial success for a tactic, use :tacn:`first` instead.

   `+` is left-associative.

>    For most purposes, :n:`(@ltac_expr1 + @ltac_expr2); @ltac_expr3` is equivalent to
>    :n:`(@ltac_expr1; @ltac_expr__3) + (@ltac_expr2; @ltac_expr3)`.  Here's an example where
>    the behavior differs slightly:

Reviewer: I believe the equivalence of `(a + b); c` to `(a; c) + (b; c)` always holds.
```suggestion
   In all cases, :n:`(@ltac_expr__1 + @ltac_expr__2); @ltac_expr__3` is equivalent to
   :n:`(@ltac_expr__1; @ltac_expr__3) + (@ltac_expr__2; @ltac_expr__3)`.
   Additionally, in most cases, :n:`(@ltac_expr__1 + @ltac_expr__2) + @ltac_expr__3` is 
   in fact equivalent to :n:`@ltac_expr__1 + (@ltac_expr__2 + @ltac_expr__3)`.
   Here's an example where the behavior differs slightly:
```

            Tactic Notation "foo" tactic_list(tacs) := first tacs.

First tactic to make progress: ||
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Yet another way of branching without backtracking is the following
structure:

> .. tacn:: @ltac_expr1 || {| @ltac_expr2 | @binder_tactic }

Reviewer: Again, why the lack of subscripts?

Author: Same thing, that from the grammar production.

   :name: || (first tactic making progress)

   :n:`@ltac_expr1 || @ltac_expr2` is
   equivalent to :n:`first [ progress @ltac_expr1 | @ltac_expr2 ]`, except that

>    if it fails, it fails like :n:`v__2`. Branching is left-associative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   if it fails, it fails like :n:`ltac_expr__2`. Branching is left-associative.
```
Also, is it clear that "branching" means `||`?

Author: Replaced "Branching" with ||.

Generalized biased branching: tryif
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: tryif @ltac_expr__test then @ltac_expr__then else @ltac_expr2__else
   :name: tryif

   is a generalization of the biased-branching tactics above. The
   expression :n:`@ltac_expr__test` is evaluated to :n:`v__if`, which is then

>    applied to each subgoal independently. For each goal where :n:`v__if`

Reviewer: The evaluation happens in the context of each subgoal independently.  This can be seen by noting that
```coq
Goal True /\ True.
  split.
  all: tryif (let n := numgoals in idtac n) then idtac else idtac.
```
prints `1` twice unlike
```coq
Goal True /\ True.
  split.
  all: let n := numgoals in [ > idtac n .. ].
```
which prints `2` twice.

Author: How is this as a replacement for that paragraph?

   For each focused goal, independently: Evaluates and applies :n:`@ltac_expr__test`.
   If :n:`@ltac_expr__test` succeeds at least once, evaluate and apply :n:`@ltac_expr__then`
   to all the subgoals generated by :n:`@ltac_expr__test`.  Otherwise, evaluate and apply
   :n:`@ltac_expr2__else` to all the subgoals generated by :n:`@ltac_expr__test`.

Reviewer: Looks good, except that you use "evaluates" in the first sentence, but use "evaluate" in the other sentences.  The tense should agree between all three sentences.

Author: Good point.  To be precise, they are both present tense, but for different numbers (It evaluates vs they evaluate).

            Tactic Notation "foo" tactic_list(tacs) := first tacs.

Solving
~~~~~~~

Selects and applies the first tactic that solves each goal (i.e. leaves no subgoal)
in a series of alternative tactics:

.. tacn:: solve [ {*| @ltac_expr__i } ]
   :name: solve

   The :n:`@ltac_expr__i` are evaluated to :n:`v__i` and :n:`v__i` must be
   tactic values, for i = 1, ..., n. If n > 1,
   :tacn:`solve` :n:`[@ltac_expr__1 | ... | @ltac_expr__n]` applies :n:`v__1` to
   each goal independently and stops if it succeeds; otherwise it tries to
   apply :n:`v__2` and so on. The message :exn:`No applicable tactic` indicates

>    there is no solving tactic.

Reviewer: Again, evaluation and application are interleaved.  If one of the branches succeeds in solving the goal, the subsequent branches will not even be evaluated.  Additionally, if a branch fails, or fails to solve the goal, not just the effects of application but also the effects of evaluation are rolled back.

Author: I have this now:

>   For each current subgoal: evaluates and applies each :n:`@ltac_expr` in order
   until one is found that solves the subgoal.  The :n:`@ltac_expr`\s must evaluate
   to tactic values.
   
>   If any of the subgoals are not solved, then the overall :tacn:`solve` fails.   

It would be good to review all of the descriptions of evaluation vs application, backtracking, etc. to get the language consistent and simple (refactoring so the common elements are described in one place).  That's a fair bit of work in itself, more than I wanted to do in this PR.

Reviewer: I would say "Any :n:`@ltac_expr`\s which do not evaluate to tactic values are skipped." rather than "The :n:`@ltac_expr`\s must evaluate to tactic values.", as `Goal True. solve [ () | 1 | constructor ].` works fine.  It's not clear what "must" means otherwise.

> It would be good to review all of the descriptions of evaluation vs application, backtracking, etc. to get the language consistent and simple (refactoring so the common elements are described in one place).

I agree

> That's a fair bit of work in itself, more than I wanted to do in this PR.

Perhaps open an issue about it, and/or mark it as `todo`, and save it for another PR / another day?  This PR is already a great improvement.

Author: > I would say "Any :n:`@ltac_expr`\s which do not evaluate to tactic values are skipped."

OK.  Is that a useful behavior?  Do other compound tactics do that, too?

> Perhaps open an issue about it, and/or mark it as `todo`, and save it for another PR / another day? This PR is already a great improvement.

I'll go for a todo.

Author: @JasonGross says:

> OK. Is that a useful behavior? Do other compound tactics do that, too?

On the contrary, I'd consider this an unfortunate design, as it makes it
harder to catch bugs and typos. It's worth mentioning as a "gotcha", I
think. It's bitten me a number of times. (Though I've been bitten even
more often by the fact that, e.g., passing a non-existent lemma to
`rewrite` is non-fatal, and so `first` and `solve` will just skip over any
such branches.)

Other compound tactics have similar behavior, I believe, in that "this is
not a tactic that can be applied to the goal and is a different kind of
value" is just a normal error that induces backtracking like any other
error.

The only place I've found it useful to mix values and tactics is in match,
for example:
```coq
lazymatch x with
| ?v :: _ => v
| _ => fail 0 "not a concrete list with a head:" x
end
```

Author: > On the contrary, I'd consider this an unfortunate design, as it makes it
harder to catch bugs and typos. It's worth mentioning as a "gotcha", I
think. It's bitten me a number of times.

I'll make it more of a warning.

Is it worth changing for Ltac1?  Worth a PR?  Would there be compatibility issues?  How about in Ltac2?  I suppose there could a "strict" flag to reject such values.

Does anyone keep a list of Ltac1 weaknesses we'd like to see fixed, though perhaps only in Ltac2?

Reviewer: > Is it worth changing for Ltac1? Worth a PR?

It's probably worth a PR, to see the impact and see if there are any
legitimate use cases.  I believe the PR would consist of making "Tactic
expected" an exception that does not use `user_err`, and marking it as
critical / uncatchable by the tactic monad.

> Would there be compatibility issues?

Quite possibly.  My hope is that all the compatibility issues exposed by
such a PR would be genuine bugs in tactic code and this fixable by deleting
the offending line of code, but it may not be the case.  (I can certainly
write some horrible code that relies on the current behavior for no good
reason.). On the other hand, such a PR might reveal a legitimate use-case
for this very questionable feature.

> How about in Ltac2?

I can't recall if it's a warning or an error in Ltac2, but I believe it's
emitted statically at the time the tactic script is type-checked (it's
analogous to writing `"foo"; ()` in OCaml).  This is much more sane.

> I suppose there could a "strict" flag to reject such values.

Indeed, if we go the route of the PR above, such a flag might be useful for
compatibility.

> Does anyone keep a list of Ltac1 weaknesses we'd like to see fixed,
though perhaps only in Ltac2?

@ppedrot might have one somewhere.  I believe most of the insane semantics
issues are already fixed in Ltac2 (at the cost of incompatibly of how one
writes tactic automation)

   .. exn:: Tactic failure: <tactic closure> succeeds.
      :undocumented:

   .. note:: :tacn:`assert_fails` and :tacn:`assert_succeeds` work as described when
      :token:`ltac_expr3` is a :token:`simple_tactic`.  In some more complex expressions,
      they may report an error from within :token:`ltac_expr3` when they shouldn't.
      This is due to the order in which parts of the :token:`ltac_expr3`
      are evaluated and executed.  For example:

      .. coqtop:: reset none

         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all fail

         assert_fails match True with _ => fail end.

      should not show any message.  The issue is that :tacn:`assert_fails` is an |Ltac|-defined

>       tactic.  That makes it a function that's processed in the evaluation phase, causing

Reviewer: It's actually a tactic notation, but that probably doesn't matter to the presentation here.  (The important thing is that it's not a special primitive construct like `tryif` or `+`.)

Author: It's a tactic notation that refers to an |Ltac|-defined tactic.  Good enough as it is.

BTW, it's odd to see `assert_succeeds` defined in terms of `assert_fails`.  

```
Ltac assert_succeeds tac :=
  tryif (assert_fails tac) then gfail 0 tac "fails" else idtac.
```

Reviewer: > BTW, it's odd to see `assert_succeeds` defined in terms of `assert_fails`.

Yes, this is because there's no way to roll back the effects of a tactic except via making it fail.  We could do something more complicated, but it's much easier to just negate `assert_fails`.

      the :tacn:`match` to find its first success earlier.  One workaround

>       is to prefix :token:`ltac_expr3` with `idtac;`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      is to prefix :token:`ltac_expr3` with `idtac;`
```
```suggestion
      is to prefix :token:`ltac_expr3` with `idtac;`.
```

      .. coqtop:: all

         assert_fails (idtac; match True with _ => fail end).

      Alternatively, substituting the :tacn:`match` into the definition of :tacn:`assert_fails` works
      as expected:

      .. coqtop:: all

>          tryif (once match True with _ => fail end) then gfail 0 tac "succeeds" else idtac.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         tryif (once match True with _ => fail end) then gfail 0 (*tac*) "succeeds" else idtac.
```
Not sure what you want to do about the unbound `tac` here...

   can be used in non-recursive cases to avoid eager
   evaluation of local definitions.

   .. but rec changes the binding!!

   :tacn:`let` is a :token:`binder_tactic`.

Application
~~~~~~~~~~~

An application is an expression of the following form:

.. tacn:: @qualid {* @tactic_arg }

   The reference :n:`@qualid` must be bound to some defined tactic definition
   expecting at least as many arguments as the provided :n:`tactic_arg`. The
   expressions :n:`@ltac_expr__i` are evaluated to :n:`v__i`, for i = 1, ..., n.

   .. what expressions ??

Function construction: fun
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A parameterized tactic can be built anonymously (without resorting to
local definitions) with:

.. tacn:: fun {+ @name } => @ltac_expr

   Indeed, local definitions of functions are a syntactic sugar for binding
   a :n:`fun` tactic to an identifier.

   :tacn:`fun` is a :token:`binder_tactic`.

Pattern matching on terms: match
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: @match_key @ltac_expr with {? %| } {+| @match_rule } end
   :name: match; lazymatch; multimatch

   .. insertprodn match_key cpattern

   .. prodn::
      match_key ::= match
      | multimatch
      | lazymatch

>       match_rule ::= {| @match_pattern | _ } => @ltac_expr

Author: Yeah will do.  The 2nd rule below is redundant; match_pattern is a term--wonder why it's there?

```
match_rule: [
| match_pattern "=>" tactic_expr5
| "_" "=>" tactic_expr5
```

FWIW, it took me 15 minutes to figure out how term derives `_` by looking at the term overview.  `term_evar` was not an obvious place to look :-(.

>       match_rule ::= {| @match_pattern | _ } => @ltac_expr

Reviewer 2: >wonder why it's there?

Maybe a left over from some old times?

>term_evar was not an obvious place to look :-(.

Hum yeah, "evar" means "existential variables" and is the name that is often employed instead of "meta-variables" because of historical reasons.

      match_pattern ::= @cpattern
      | context {? @ident } [ @cpattern ]
      cpattern ::= @term

   .. todo I don't fully understand these descriptions.  I think some concepts
      such as backtracking need to be explained first and that the lanugage
      can probably be simplified.

   :tacn:`match`, :tacn:`lazymatch` and :tacn:`multimatch` are :token:`ltac_expr1`\s.

   `multimatch`
      Allows subsequent tactics to
      backtrack into a right-hand side tactic which has backtracking points

>       left and trigger the selection of a new matching branch when all the

Author: Yes, "left over" is a reasonable alternative.  But I can just refer to cpattern and ltac_expr instead of right and left hand sides, that seems clearer and less wordy.

      backtracking points of the right-hand side have been consumed.

      :tacn:`match` :n:`…` is, in fact, shorthand for :tacn:`once` :tacn:`multimatch` `…`.

   `lazymatch`
      Causes the match to commit to the first matching branch
      rather than trying a new matching if the right-hand side fails. If
      the right-hand side of the selected branch is a tactic with
      backtracking points, then subsequent failures cause this tactic to

>       backtrack.

Author: It needs an introductory paragraph covering matches in general, then an entry for `match`.  I think the position will be OK if that's added.  Hard to write something because I don't understand how `match` differs from the other 2.  See the `todo PR` I added.

We need a paragraph or two explaining backtracking, which I don't understand well enough to explain (I can only guess).  It seems to apply to several constructs, such as match, +, tryif, first, so maybe it should be a subsection.  Which ones does it apply to?  "Backtracking branching" is just a different phrase for the same thing?

I guess the difference is relevant for constructs like match ... end + match ... end.

>       backtrack.

Reviewer 2: Yes, backtracking applies to all this and is probably best explain in the description of `+`. "Backtracking branching" is perhaps a bit confusing for a section title. It could be "Creating backtracking points".

>       backtrack.

Author: I'm matching the behavior of `tac + tac` and `tac ; tac` to their current descriptions.  `+` talks about backtracking, but only `;` does it below.  Does the current doc have it backwards?  What's the story?

```

multimatch False with
| False => idtac "1"
| _ => idtac "2"
end +
multimatch False with
| False => idtac "1B"; fail
| _ => idtac "2B"; fail
end.

(* 1 *)

multimatch False with
| False => idtac "1"
| _ => idtac "2"
end ;
multimatch False with
| False => idtac "1B"; fail
| _ => idtac "2B"; fail
end.

(*
Tactic failure.
1
1B
2B
2
1B
2B
*)
```

>       backtrack.

Reviewer: The difference between `+` and `;` is not backtracking (that's the difference between `match`, `lazymatch`, and `multimatch`).  The difference is that `+` is alternatives, while `;` is sequencing.  If you imagine each tactic produces a potentially infinite stream of successes, together with a particular error to raise when you run out of successes, then the semantics of `a + b` are "concatenate the stream of `a` with the stream of `b`, and if you run out of all of these, use the error message from `b`".  On the other hand, `a; b` is sort-of a flat-map: "for each success of `a` with side effects `A`, for each success of `b` with side effects `B`, have the success with side effect '`A` followed by `B`'".

In your first case, what happens is that your first `multimatch` succeeds, so the second one is never run, because you just end up using the success from the first alternative.  In the second case, with `;`, what happens is that the first tactic has two successes, `idtac "1"` and `idtac "2"`.  So first you `idtac "1"`, and see if you can get a success from the second tactic.  When the second tactic fails, you go back and try the other success of the first one, `idtac "2"`, and then try the second tactic again.

>       backtrack.

Author: I'll need considerable elaboration to make sense of your comment--too many unclear concepts.  Let's take it bit by bit.  Concrete examples are helpful.

- I don't see why `;' isn't considered backtracking.  Certainly in the ordinary sense of the word it is backtracking.  Why is the distinction significant?

- For '+', the doc says "The tactic value v1 is applied to each focused goal independently and if it fails or a later tactic fails, then the proof **backtracks** to the current goal and v2 is applied.".  Can you give me an example for this?

- "Success" seems to be used very loosely in the existing doc.  This is particularly opaque: "If you imagine each tactic produces a potentially infinite stream of successes, together with a particular error to raise when you run out of successes".  What's a concrete example or two of producing a very large number of successes from a single tactic?  (FWIW, an infinite series of successes would take forever to run :-)

>       backtrack.

Reviewer: Please read http://coqhott.gforge.inria.fr/blog/coq-tactic-engine/, an excellent explanation of the tactic engine by @ppedrot.  I'd rather not re-explain various bits of it piecemeal.

I expect your first two points to be addressed by this blog post.  To give you concrete examples for the final bullet point:
> What's a concrete example or two of producing a very large number of successes from a single tactic? (FWIW, an infinite series of successes would take forever to run :-)

If you have an inductive type `T` with `n` constructors, the `constructor` tactic produces `n` successes on the goal `T`.  The tactic `Ltac strange := idtac + strange.` produces infinitely many successes (importantly, the potentially infinite stream is lazy, so you don't run them all when you don't need to); `strange` succeeds instantly, but `strange; fail` runs forever.

>       backtrack.

Author: I read the post.  For the first two, it seems like I'd have to explain some aspects of monads in order to describe the behavior of Ltac, though perhaps we don't need to introduce the term itself--not sure it's essential to know the term to use Ltac, let alone Coq.  Not sure the relevant points can be explained simply and fully.

In a number of places, the doc mentions evaluating ltac expressions as a step before applying them.  Is there a separation of evaluation and application into separate phases, e.g. evaluation corresponds to constructing the monads, the application is execution of the monads?

There is no mention of the Ltac `;` or `+` constructs in the post.

The infinite successes would be a bit fun to explain.  I take it that that's useful though the example is not realistic.

>       backtrack.

Reviewer: > In a number of places, the doc mentions evaluating ltac expressions as a step before applying them. Is there a separation of evaluation and application into separate phases,

Yes, evaluation is what I called "expression evaluation" in https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r432990765, and "application" is what I called "runtime".

> e.g. evaluation corresponds to constructing the monads, the application is execution of the monads?

No, again, see https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r432990765 for the distinction.

> There is no mention of the Ltac `;` or `+` constructs in the post.

`;` is sequencing in the monad, and corresponds to `tclBIND` in the post when the second tactic takes no argument. The `+` construct almost the same thing as `tclOR` (again when the second tactic takes no argument), except that it runs on each goal separately.  that is, `a + b` is always the same as `[ > a + b .. ]`, while this is not true of `tclOR` (note though that `tclOR` is not exposed to the user of Ltac, but is only exposed to OCaml plugin developers).

>       backtrack.

Reviewer: > The infinite successes would be a bit fun to explain. I take it that that's useful though the example is not realistic.

It's useful to have multiple successes, and it's useful not to limit the number to any particular finite number.  Given arbitrary recursion, it's not practical to enforce that the number of successes is finite.  I've never seen an actual application of infinitely many successes.  The first one that comes to mind is implementing a parser in Ltac on a grammar that admits a potentially infinite number of valid parses (e.g., some ambiguous regular expression grammars).

>       backtrack.

Reviewer: Oh, here's another tactic which is more useful and ends up having an infinite number of successes:
```coq
Ltac inhabit := constructor; inhabit.
```
This tactic will try to inhabit inductive types.  It has an infinite number of successes on `nat`, and you can use this do proof search with something like
```coq
unshelve eexists; [ inhabit | <some sort of proof procedure that will only succeed on some nats> ]
```
(The tactic will loop if you set up your inductive type so that the base case comes after the recursive case, though.)

>       backtrack.

Author: I'll ponder your comments Monday.

It would nice if you could give an example showing backtracking for `+`.  The doc says "The tactic value v1 is applied to each focused goal independently and if it fails or a later tactic fails, then the proof backtracks to the current goal and v2 is applied."

>       backtrack.

Reviewer: Contrived example of backtracking using `+`:
```coq
Goal unit * True.
  split; (pose tt + pose I); assumption.
Qed.
```

A parameterized tactic can be built anonymously (without resorting to
local definitions) with:

.. tacn:: fun {+ @name } => @ltac_expr

   Indeed, local definitions of functions are a syntactic sugar for binding
   a :n:`fun` tactic to an identifier.

   :tacn:`fun` is a :token:`binder_tactic`.

Pattern matching on terms: match
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: @match_key @ltac_expr with {? %| } {+| @match_pattern => @ltac_expr } end
   :name: match; lazymatch; multimatch

   .. insertprodn match_key cpattern

   .. prodn::
      match_key ::= match
      | multimatch
      | lazymatch
      match_pattern ::= @cpattern
      | context {? @ident } [ @cpattern ]
      cpattern ::= @term

   .. todo I don't fully understand these descriptions.  I think some concepts
      such as backtracking need to be explained first and that the lanugage
      can probably be simplified.

   :tacn:`match`, :tacn:`lazymatch` and :tacn:`multimatch` are :token:`ltac_expr1`\s.

   `match`
      TBA

     .. todo PR: How does match differ from multimatch and lazymatch?  Does it consider
        multiple matches if tactics fail, but won't backtrack if tactics after the match

>         fail?

Reviewer 2: This can indeed be inferred from the description of `multimatch` and `lazymatch`. What you wrote is precisely it AFAICT. This is also confirmed by the comment about `match` being expressed in terms of `once` and `multimatch`.

Author: Any idea why this doesn't work?  I wanted to verify that match uses nonlinear unification.

```
match (add 1 1) with
| (add ?X ?X) => idtac "yes"
| _ => idtac "no"
end.

(* The reference add was not found in the current environment. *)
```

Reviewer: Use `constr:(add 1 1)`.  The default interpretation is to treat application as Ltac function application, not term application.

Author: No change.  The error with either form is on the second `add`.

```
match constr:(add 1 1) with
| (add ?X ?X) => idtac "yes"
| _ => idtac "no"
end.

(* The reference add was not found in the current environment. *)
```

Reviewer: Ah, that's because it's called `plus`, not `add`.

Author: Right, thanks.

   `multimatch`
      Allows subsequent tactics to

>       backtrack into an :n:`@ltac_expr` that has unused backtracking points

Reviewer 2: "unused" is a bit odd in this context. I think removing it would still be pretty readable.
```suggestion
      backtrack into an :n:`@ltac_expr` that has backtracking points
```

      backtrack.

   :n:`@cpattern`
      The syntax of :token:`cpattern` is
      the same as that of terms, but it is extended with pattern matching
      metavariables. In :token:`cpattern`, a pattern matching metavariable is
      represented with the syntax :n:`?@ident`. The
      notation :g:`_` can also be used to denote metavariable whose instance is
      irrelevant. In the notation :n:`?@ident`, the identifier allows us to keep
      instantiations and to make constraints whereas :g:`_` shows that we are not
      interested in what will be matched. On the right hand side of pattern matching
      clauses, the named metavariables are used without the question mark prefix. There
      is also a special notation for second-order pattern matching: in an
      applicative pattern of the form :n:`@`\ :n:`?@ident @ident__1 … @ident__n`,
      the variable :token:`ident` matches any complex expression with (possible)
      dependencies in the variables :n:`@ident__i` and returns a functional term
      of the form :n:`fun @ident__1 … @ident__n => @term`.

   :n:`context {? @ident } [ @cpattern ]`
      This special form of pattern matches any term with a subterm matching

>       cpattern. If there is a match, the optional :n:`@ident` is assigned the "matched

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      :n:`@cpattern`. If there is a match, the optional :n:`@ident` is assigned the "matched
```
?

      context", i.e. the initial term where the matched subterm is replaced by a
      hole. The example below will show how to use such term contexts.

      If the evaluation of the :token:`ltac_expr` of a valid match fails, the next
      matching subterm is tried. If no further subterm matches, the next clause
      is tried. Matching subterms are considered from top to bottom and from left to
      right (with respect to the raw printing obtained by setting the
      :flag:`Printing All` flag).

     .. example:: Use of `context` in match on terms

        .. coqtop:: all abort

           Ltac f x :=
             match x with
               context f [S ?X] =>
               idtac X;                    (* To display the evaluation order *)
               assert (p := eq_refl 1 : X=1);    (* To filter the case X=1 *)
               let x:= context f[O] in assert (x=O) (* To observe the context *)
             end.
           Goal True.
           f (3+4).

   .. todo @term after context is actually @lconstr_pattern (term with holes), which is spliced away

>       Maybe worth restoring that distinction?

Reviewer: I don't understand this, what is `@term`.  We seem to be using `@cpattern`?  Also, where is the syntax for `let @ident := context @ident [ @term ] in ...` explained / defined?

Author: `cpattern` is a synonym for `term` to help with the presentation.  We use `term` in the doc instead of `lconstr`.  It's equivalent to `operconstr` level 200 in the mlgs.

You should look at the HTML version of the doc.  Everything in the grammar is hyperlinked.

   :name: lazymatch; match; multimatch

   .. insertprodn match_key cpattern

   .. prodn::
      match_key ::= lazymatch
      | match
      | multimatch
      match_pattern ::= @cpattern
      | context {? @ident } [ @cpattern ]
      cpattern ::= @term

   .. todo I don't fully understand these descriptions.  I think some concepts
      such as backtracking need to be explained first and that the lanugage
      can probably be simplified.

   :tacn:`lazymatch`, :tacn:`match` and :tacn:`multimatch` are :token:`ltac_expr1`\s.

   .. todo: below: "yield" or "be"??

   Evaluates :n:`@ltac_expr__term`, which must yield a term, and matches it
   sequentially with the :token:`match_pattern`\s, which may have
   metavariables.  When a match is found, metavariable values are substituted
   into :n:`@ltac_expr`, which is then applied.

   Matching may continue depending on whether  `lazymatch`, `match` or `multimatch`
   is specified.

   In the :token:`match_pattern`\s, metavariable values have the form :n:`?@ident`, whereas
   in the :n:`@ltac_expr`\s, the question mark is omitted.  Choose your metavariable
   names with care.

>    Matching is done with non-linear unification: if a

Reviewer: Careful.  It's not full-blown unification, as the following fails:
```coq
Goal True /\ (fun x => x) True.
  match goal with
  | [ |- ?x /\ ?x ] => idtac
  end.
```
But I think it's not quite syntactic matching either.  @ppedrot might have an example of these dragons?

Author: Wouldn't unifying `True` and `(fun x => x) True` make it second-order unification?  I wouldn't expect unification to do that.  Of course, we have no documentation of how we do unification.

Reviewer: Perhaps
```suggestion
   Matching is done with non-linear syntactic unification: if a
```
Note that `let x := constr:(True) in let y := constr:((fun x => x) True) in unify x y` succeeds, while replacing `unify` with `constr_eq` causes it to fail.  My point was about it using something more like `constr_eq` rather than `unify`.

Author: I'll revert to the original "Matching is non-linear" and leave a "todo" in the file.

Syntactic matching would be comparing the ASTs, right?  Would `((x + y))` match `1 + 2`?Though maybe it's a silly pattern.

Reviewer: > Syntactic matching would be comparing the ASTs, right? 

Yes.

> Would `((x + y))` match `1 + 2`?Though maybe it's a silly pattern.

`((x +y))` does not match`1 + 2`, but `((?x + ?y))` (which parses to `Nat.add ?x ?y`) does match `1 + 2` (which is `Nat.add 1 2`).  Note that matching happens after notations are interpreted (they happen on, basically, the `Set Printing All` version of the terms).

      hole. The example below shows how to use such term contexts.

      For :tacn:`match` and :tacn:`multimatch`, if the evaluation of the :token:`ltac_expr`
      fails, the next matching subterm is tried. If no further subterm matches, the next branch
      is tried.  Matching subterms are considered from top to bottom and from left to
      right (with respect to the raw printing obtained by setting the
      :flag:`Printing All` flag).

     .. example:: Use of `context` in match on terms

        .. coqtop:: all abort

           Ltac f x :=
             match x with
               context f [S ?X] =>
               idtac X;                    (* To display the evaluation order *)
               assert (p := eq_refl 1 : X=1);    (* To filter the case X=1 *)
               let x:= context f[O] in assert (x=O) (* To observe the context *)
             end.
           Goal True.
           f (3+4).

   .. todo There's a more realistic example from @JasonGross here:
      https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r432996954

   .. todo @term after context is actually @lconstr_pattern (term with holes), which is spliced away
      Maybe worth restoring that distinction?

>    .. todo PR Didn't understand the following 2 paragraphs well enough to revise

Reviewer: Here is an example:
```coq
Goal True.
  match constr:(fun x : nat => (x, x)) with
  | fun a : ?A => ?f => pose (fun a : A => (f, f))
  end.
```

   Alternatively, when a metavariable in the form :n:`?id` occurs under binders,
   say :n:`x__1, …, x__n` and the expression matches, the
   metavariable is instantiated by a term which can then be used in any
   context which also binds the variables :n:`x__1, …, x__n` with
   same types. This provides with a primitive form of matching under
   context which does not require manipulating a functional term.

>    If the match expression is in position to be applied to a goal
>    (e.g. it is not bound to a variable by a :n:`let in`), then this tactic is
>    applied. If the tactic succeeds, the list of resulting subgoals is the

Reviewer: This is false.  
```suggestion
   If the match expression evaluates to a tactic (as opposed to, e.g., a constr or integer),
   then this tactic is
   applied. If the tactic succeeds,
```

>    result of the match expression. If the match expression is not in position

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the result of the match expression is `idtac`. If the match expression is not in position
```

>    result of the match expression. If the match expression is not in position
>    to be applied to a goal, then the result of the evaluation of :n:`@ltac_expr__1`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the result of the match expression is `idtac`. If the match expression does not evaluate
   to a tactic, then the result of the evaluation of :n:`@ltac_expr__1`
```

   is the result of the match expression.

   .. exn:: Expression does not evaluate to a tactic.

>       :n:`@ltac_expr` must evaluate to a tactic.

Reviewer: This is not an error message of `match`, but of Ltac in general.  It can be obtained, for example, by
```coq
Goal True.
  let f := constr:(1) in
  f.
```

Author: Yeah, but at the moment all messages are associated with tactics and commands.  Seems like it might be difficult to determine which messages are specific to a single tactic/command versus those that apply to multiple constructs.

   .. exn:: No matching clauses for match.

>       None of the patterns match and, in particular, there is no :n:`_` pattern.

Reviewer: Not technically true, consider
```coq
Goal True.
  match goal with
  | _ => fail
  | [ |- False ] => idtac
  end.
```

Author: The message appears when no branch matches the pattern whose action (initially) succeeds?

Reviewer: That is closer, but consider
```coq
Goal True.
  multimatch goal with
  | _ => idtac
  | [ |- False ] => fail
  end; fail.
  (* Error: No matching clauses for match. *)
```
and
```coq
Goal True.
  lazymatch goal with
  | _ => fail
  | [ |- False ] => fail
  end.
  (* Error: Tactic failure. *)
```
I believe the precise/technical description may be:
The message appears when all successes of a `match` or `multimatch` have been exhausted before all potential matches/branches have been exhausted, and also occurs when no branch of a `lazymatch` has a matching pattern.

(This requires modelling each `match` as having multiple branches, each of which can have zero or more successes, and the evaluation of a match proceeds by going through each branch in turn, checking if it matches, and then exhausting the successes of that branch before moving on to the next one.)

      This happens when :n:`@ltac_expr` does not denote a term.

.. _match_term_context_ex:

   .. example:: Multiple matches for a "context" pattern.

      Internally "x <> y" is represented as "(not x y)", which produces the
      first match.

      .. coqtop:: in reset

         Ltac f t := match t with
                    | context [ (not ?t) ] => idtac "?t = " t; fail
                    | _ => idtac
                    end.
         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all

         f ((not True) <> (not False)).

.. _match_with_holes_ex:

   .. example:: Matching a pattern with holes

      Notice the :tacn:`idtac` prints ``(z + 1)`` while the :tacn:`pose` substitutes
      ``(x + 1)``.

      .. coqtop:: in reset

         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all

           match constr:(fun x => (x + 1) * 3) with
           | fun z => ?y * 3 => idtac "y =" y; pose (fun z: nat => y * 5)
           end.

.. _match_vs_lazymatch_ex:

   .. example:: Comparison of match, multimatch and lazymatch

>       **todo: how do match and multimatch differ?**

Author: No, but I need to understand this.

         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all

         match False with
         | False => idtac "try"; fail
         | _ => easy
         end.

      .. coqtop:: reset in

         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all

         multimatch False with
         | False => idtac "try"; fail
         | _ => easy
         end.

      .. coqtop:: reset in

         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all fail

         lazymatch False with
         | False => idtac "try"; fail
         | _ => easy
         end.

.. _ltac-match-goal:

Pattern matching on goals: match goal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. todo PR The title seems incomplete, should be "goals and hypotheses", right?

Use this form to match against goals.  These patterns have zero or
more subpatterns to match hypotheses followed by a subpattern to match
the conclusion.

.. tacn:: @match_key {? reverse } goal with {? %| } {+| @match_context_rule } end
   :name: match goal; lazymatch goal; multimatch goal

   .. insertprodn match_context_rule match_hyp

   .. prodn::
      match_context_rule ::= {*, @match_hyp } |- @match_pattern => @ltac_expr
      | [ {*, @match_hyp } |- @match_pattern ] => @ltac_expr

>       | _ => @ltac_expr

Reviewer 2: I think it might not be worth presenting things a little differently: have a non-terminal for the pattern part (since this is the only part that changes) and inline the `=> @ltac_expr` in the main `tacn`. Same thing could be done for the `=> @ltac_expr` in the `match` `tacn` of the previous section.

Author: OK, though this one will no longer fit a single line in the :tacn:.  Any ideas for shorter names?

Reviewer 2: What about `goal_pattern`?

Author: I'll use that.

Unrelated question:
A match_context_pattern (aka goal_pattern) in the form `A |- B` means to match A against a hypothesis and B against the current goal (and only 1 goal at a time)?  Need to explain this basic info.

Reviewer: > A match_context_pattern (aka goal_pattern) in the form `A |- B` means to match A against a hypothesis and B against the current goal (and only 1 goal at a time)?

Yes.  But more generally `A1 , ... , An |- B` means to match `B` against the goal and to match `A1 , ... , An` against distinct hypotheses (the relative order of the `A1` ... `An` only matters for what order the matches are considered in, and otherwise order does not matter; that is, if we have `H1 : True` and `H2 : False`, then matching `A1 : ?A, A2 : ?B` will produce a match with `?A := True` and `?B := False`, as well as a match with `?A := False` and `?B := True`).  And, indeed, `match` (and `lazymatch` and `multimatch`) are always focusing, and apply to each goal independently.

Author: @JasonGross Got it, except the last sentence: "And, indeed, match (and lazymatch and multimatch) are always focusing, and apply to each goal independently."  What is meant by "always focusing"?  It will process multiple goals or not?  Maybe give an example?

Reviewer: The following works fine:
```coq
Goal True /\ (True -> True).
  split;
    match goal with
    | [ |- True ] => constructor
    | [ |- True -> True ] => intro; assumption
    end.
```
The following does not work:
```coq
Goal True /\ (True -> True).
  split;
    match goal with
    | _ => [ > constructor | intro; assumption ]
    end.
```

      match_hyp ::= @name : @match_pattern
      | @name := {? [ @match_pattern ] : } @match_pattern

>    :tacn:`match goal`, :tacn:`lazymatch goal` and :tacn:`multimatch goal` are :token:`ltac_expr1`\s.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :tacn:`match goal`, :tacn:`lazymatch goal` and :tacn:`multimatch goal` are :token:`l1_tactic`\s.
```

   `multimatch` (in :token:`match_key`)
      Allows subsequent tactics
      to backtrack into a right-hand side tactic which has backtracking points
      left and trigger the selection of a new matching branch or combination of
      hypotheses when all the backtracking points of the right-hand side have
      been consumed.

      :n:`match { reverse } goal …` is, in fact, shorthand for
      :n:`once multimatch { reverse } goal …`.

   `lazymatch` (in :token:`match_key`)
      Causes the match to commit to the first matching branch with the first
      matching combination of hypotheses rather than trying a new match if
      the right-hand side fails. If the right-hand side of the selected branch
      is a tactic with backtracking points, then subsequent failures cause

>       this tactic to backtrack.

Reviewer 2: Since the explanation is basically the same as above (the text is slightly different but the previous explanation was generic enough to apply here as well), I think it could be removed from this section. It would make things much lighter.

Author: Perhaps--maybe come back to this after match term is in better shape.  "combination of hypotheses" is definitely different.  Maybe we can link to the descriptions in match terms above.

>    If each hypothesis pattern :n:`match_hyp`\ :sub:`1,i`, with i = 1, ..., m\ :sub:`1` is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If each hypothesis pattern :n:`@match_hyp`\ :sub:`1,i`, with i = 1, ..., m\ :sub:`1` is
```

Author: Fixed.  An unrelated question:  I didn't expect to see "Tactic failure" here.  What's going on?

```
(multimatch True with
| True => idtac "branch 1"
| _ => idtac "branch 2"
end ;
match True with
| True => idtac "branch A"; fail
end) ; idtac.

Output:
Tactic failure.
branch 1
branch A
branch 2
branch A

```

Reviewer: I can only imagine that your output comes from an improper interleaving of stdout and stderr.  The actual output is
```
branch 1
branch A
branch 2
branch A
File "/tmp/foo.v", line 2, characters 2-161:
Error: Tactic failure.
```
The `Tactic failure` is a result of your `fail`, and I don't see why you expect things to succeed overall.

> It makes me wonder whether the backtracking mechanism behaves consistently enough for us to document.

Backtracking is pretty consistent, and definitely worth documenting.  The only confusing part is the interaction of backtracking with failure level, which indeed I'm not sure if we should document because I don't have a sensible model of it in my head. @ppedrot @aspiwack, can one of you describe how failure levels are intended to interact with backtracking points introduced by `+`?  Consider the following:
```coq
Goal True.
  Fail match goal with | [ |- True ] => idtac end; fail 2. (* Tactic failure (level 2). *)
  Fail lazymatch goal with | [ |- True ] => idtac end; fail 2. (* Tactic failure (level 2). *)
  Fail multimatch goal with | [ |- True ] => idtac end; fail 2. (* Tactic failure (level 1). *)
  Fail idtac; fail 2. (* Tactic failure (level 2). *)
  Fail (idtac + idtac); fail 2. (* Tactic failure (level 1). *)
  Fail (fail 2 + idtac). (* Tactic failure (level 1). *)
  Fail (fail 2 + idtac) + idtac. (* Tactic failure. *)
  Fail fail 2 + (idtac + idtac). (* Tactic failure (level 1). *)
  Fail fail 2 + idtac + idtac. (* Tactic failure (level 1). *)
```
As I understand it, the behavior is something like "when backtracking across a `fail`, reduce the failure level by 1; if the failure level is now 0, try the next option in the stream of successes; if the failure level is still non-zero, then discard the remaining successes and fail"

@jfehrle The purpose of failure level is to break out of nested backtracking: for example, `first [ a; fail 1 | b ]` will not try `b` if `a` succeeds and leaves over any goals (the entire tactic will instead fail), while it will try `b` when `a` fails.

.. example::

   .. coqtop:: all abort

      Ltac time_constr1 tac :=
        let eval_early := match goal with _ => restart_timer "(depth 1)" end in
        let ret := tac () in
        let eval_early := match goal with _ => finish_timing ( "Tactic evaluation" ) "(depth 1)" end in
        ret.

      Goal True.
        let v := time_constr
             ltac:(fun _ =>
                     let x := time_constr1 ltac:(fun _ => constr:(10 * 10)) in
                     let y := time_constr1 ltac:(fun _ => eval compute in x) in
                     y) in
        pose v.

Local definitions: let
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: let {? rec } @let_clause {* with @let_clause } in @ltac_expr

   .. insertprodn let_clause let_clause

   .. prodn::
      let_clause ::= @name := @ltac_expr
      | @ident {+ @name } := @ltac_expr

   Evaluates each :n:`@let_clause`, substitutes the bound variables into
   :n:`@ltac_expr` and then evaluates :n:`@ltac_expr`.  There are no dependencies
   between the :n:`@let_clause`\s.

   Creates a local definition.
   Using :tacn:`let` `rec` makes the definition recursive and causes
   the definitions to be evaluated lazily.  Thus, :tacn:`let` `rec`

>    can be used in non-recursive cases to avoid eager

Reviewer: > Doesn't it apply only in case `rec` was not provided?

Indeed,
```coq
Goal True.
  let x _ := y ()
  with y _ := x () in
  idtac.
```
fails but
```coq
Goal True.
  let rec x _ := y ()
  with y _ := x () in
  idtac.
```
succeeds.

>    can be used in non-recursive cases to avoid eager

Author: What does (as I reworded it) "`rec` can also be used for non-recursive cases to avoid eager evaluation of local definitions." mean?  How is it useful?  @JasonGross Can you give an example?

>    can be used in non-recursive cases to avoid eager

Reviewer: ```coq
Goal True /\ True.
  Fail let x := match goal with |- True => idtac end in
       split; x. (* Error: No matching clauses for match. *)
  let rec x := match goal with |- True => idtac end in
  split; x. (* success *)
```
Doing `let rec f := body in` for a non-recursive body seems to have exactly the same effect as as prefixing `body` with `idtac; `.  (Note that this trick is useless for local definitions that evaluate to something other than a tactic, because, I believe, without arguments, there's no way to get the resulting thunked tactic to actually run.)

>    can be used in non-recursive cases to avoid eager

Author: Then I think it's better to omit it.  It would need more explanation to make it clear and the benefit is quite small.  It seems like an artifact of how things happen to be implemented rather than intentional behavior.  It's possible that this will change in Ltac or Ltac2 if the implementation changes for other reasons.  Documenting it moves it closer to being a promised behavior.

>    can be used in non-recursive cases to avoid eager

Reviewer: Ltac2 does not have this same separation between tactics effecting the goal vs tactics returning a value, and does not have this same two-phase evaluation semantics, so this bit will not apply to Ltac2.  I don't see things around this changing in Ltac1, though I suppose it is possible.  I don't see a real harm in documenting it here, but it also seems fine to omit this corner-case.  (I would lean towards documenting it just for completeness' sake, and Ltac is already filled with accidental artifacts that have become relied-upon features, but I'm okay with it either way.)

   :name: lazymatch; match; multimatch

   .. insertprodn match_key cpattern

   .. prodn::
      match_key ::= lazymatch
      | match
      | multimatch
      match_pattern ::= @cpattern
      | context {? @ident } [ @cpattern ]
      cpattern ::= @term

   .. todo I don't fully understand these descriptions.  I think some concepts
      such as backtracking need to be explained first and that the lanugage
      can probably be simplified.

   :tacn:`lazymatch`, :tacn:`match` and :tacn:`multimatch` are :token:`ltac_expr1`\s.

   .. todo: below: "yield" or "be"??

   Evaluates :n:`@ltac_expr__term`, which must yield a term, and matches it
   sequentially with the :token:`match_pattern`\s, which may have
   metavariables.  When a match is found, metavariable values are substituted
   into :n:`@ltac_expr`, which is then applied.

   Matching may continue depending on whether  `lazymatch`, `match` or `multimatch`
   is specified.

   In the :token:`match_pattern`\s, metavariable values have the form :n:`?@ident`, whereas
   in the :n:`@ltac_expr`\s, the question mark is omitted.  Choose your metavariable

>    names with care.

Reviewer: The missing explanation is that if, for example, you use the metavariable name `?S`, then you can no longer use `S` to refer to a constructor of `nat`, and must instead use `Datatypes.S` (or similar).

      Causes the match to commit to the first matching branch
      rather than trying a new match if :n:`@ltac_expr` fails.
      :ref:`Example<match_vs_lazymatch_ex>`.

   `match`
      If :n:`@ltac_expr` fails, continue matching with the next branch.
      Failures in subsequent tactics (after the `match`) will not cause selection
      of a new branch.  Examples :ref:`here<match_vs_lazymatch_ex>` and
      :ref:`here<match_vs_multimatch_ex>`.

   `multimatch`
      If :n:`@ltac_expr` fails, continue matching with the next branch.
      When an :n:`@ltac_expr` succeeds for a branch, subsequent failures
      (after the `multimatch`) causing consumption of all the backtracking points
      (if any) in :n:`@ltac_expr` triggers selection of a new matching branch.
      :ref:`Example<match_vs_multimatch_ex>`.

      :tacn:`match` :n:`…` is, in fact, shorthand for :tacn:`once` :tacn:`multimatch` `…`.

   :n:`@cpattern`
      The syntax of :token:`cpattern` is
      the same as that of :token:`term`\s, but it can contain pattern matching
      metavariables in the form :n:`?@ident`.  :g:`_` can be used to match
      irrelevant terms.  :ref:`Example<match_with_holes_ex>`.

>       .. todo PR Didn't understand the following paragraph well enough to revise

Reviewer: Here is an example (perhaps not the best one, because it relies on the trick of `match a with b => c end` reducing the `match` away):
```coq
Ltac uncurry f :=
  lazymatch f with
  | fun (a : ?A) (b : ?B) => ?f (* note the lack of `@?` *)
    => let ab := fresh in
       uncurry (fun ab : A * B => match fst ab, snd ab with a, b => f end)
  | ?f => f
  end.

Goal True.
  let x := uncurry (fun (a b c : unit) (d e : nat) => (a, b, c, d, e)) in
  pose x.
  (* 1 subgoal (ID 38)

  p := fun H0 : unit * unit * unit * nat * nat =>
       (fst (fst (fst (fst H0))), snd (fst (fst (fst H0))),
       snd (fst (fst H0)), snd (fst H0), snd H0)
   : unit * unit * unit * nat * nat -> unit * unit * unit * nat * nat
  ============================
  True
   *)
```
Here is a variant that doesn't use that
```coq
Ltac uncurry f :=
  lazymatch (eval cbv beta in f) with
  | fun (a : ?A) (b : ?B) => ?f (* note the lack of `@?` *)
    => let ab := fresh in
       uncurry ((fun F (ab : A * B) => F (fst ab) (snd ab)) (fun (a : A) (b : B) => f))
  | ?f => f
  end.

Goal True.
  let x := uncurry (fun (a b c : unit) (d e : nat) => (a, b, c, d, e)) in
  pose x.
  (* 1 subgoal (ID 38)

  p := fun H0 : unit * unit * unit * nat * nat =>
       (fst (fst (fst (fst H0))), snd (fst (fst (fst H0))),
       snd (fst (fst H0)), snd (fst H0), snd H0)
   : unit * unit * unit * nat * nat -> unit * unit * unit * nat * nat
  ============================
  True
   *)
```
Does this explain it?

>       .. todo PR Didn't understand the following paragraph well enough to revise

Reviewer: Note also that you are already making use of this feature in `_match_with_holes_ex:`

      Notice the :tacn:`idtac` prints ``(z + 1)`` while the :tacn:`pose` substitutes
      ``(x + 1)``.

      .. coqtop:: in reset

         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all

           match constr:(fun x => (x + 1) * 3) with
           | fun z => ?y * 3 => idtac "y =" y; pose (fun z: nat => y * 5)
           end.

.. _match_term_context_ex:

   .. example:: Multiple matches for a "context" pattern.

      Internally "x <> y" is represented as "(not x y)", which produces the
      first match.

      .. coqtop:: in reset

         Ltac f t := match t with
                    | context [ (not ?t) ] => idtac "?t = " t; fail
                    | _ => idtac
                    end.
         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all

         f ((not True) <> (not False)).

.. _ltac-match-goal:

Pattern matching on goals and hypotheses: match goal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: @match_key {? reverse } goal with {? %| } {+| @goal_pattern => @ltac_expr } end
   :name: lazymatch goal; match goal; multimatch goal

   .. insertprodn goal_pattern match_hyp

   .. prodn::
      goal_pattern ::= {*, @match_hyp } |- @match_pattern

>       | [ {*, @match_hyp } |- @match_pattern ]

Reviewer 2: I don't think the meaning of the square brackets is explained anywhere...

Reviewer: Note that the square brackets have no meaning, and are purely aesthetic (much like the initial `|` in inductive constructor cases and in `match` statements).

Reviewer 2: OK thanks, this should probably be written down somewhere.

Author: What do the square brackets mean in `@name := {? [ @match_pattern ] : } @match_pattern`?  That doesn't look like it's just syntactic sugar.

Author: Oh, I see in the next comment.

      | _
      match_hyp ::= @name : @match_pattern

>       | @name := {? [ @match_pattern ] : } @match_pattern

Reviewer 2: `match_hyp` is not explained but quite intuitive to understand, except the square brackets (which may simply be there so that the parser can figure out what is part of the term and what is part of the type) and the way the `{? }` is wrapped. I wonder if it wouldn't be clearer if it was split into two rules:

```
      match_hyp ::= @name : @match_pattern
      | @name := @match_pattern
      | @name := [ @match_pattern ] : @match_pattern
```

Reviewer: >  except the square brackets (which may simply be there so that the parser can figure out what is part of the term and what is part of the type)

Note that the square brackets are only needed if you overwrite the infix `:` notation with your own notation.  Otherwise `@name := @match_pattern : @match_pattern` will be exactly the same as `@name := [ @match_pattern ] : @match_pattern`  Note also that the square brackets mean that if you want to match a context-bound list, you either have to double the brackets or wrap your list in parentheses.  Note also that when `@match_pattern` is `[?x ; ?y]` (for list), the `@name := @match_pattern` fails to parse correctly, and instead there is an error about a missing `:`

Reviewer 2: That's a lot of interesting remarks probably worth writing down in the doc...

Author: These are not intuitive to me.  Would you explain?

```
      | @name := @match_pattern
      | @name := [ @match_pattern ] : @match_pattern
```

Reviewer: Consider the goal in
```coq
Goal let x := True in let y := 0 in False -> nat -> True.
  intros.
  (* 1 subgoal (ID 6)

  x := True : Prop
  y := 0 : nat
  H : False
  H0 : nat
  ============================
  True
*)
```
The pattern `v := ?X` will match `x` (with `X` bound to `True`) and `y` (with `X` bound to `0`).  The pattern `v := [ ?X ] : ?T` and `v := ?X : ?T` (which are identical unless you've overridden the infix `:` notation) will match `x` (with `X` bound to `True` and `T` bound to `Prop`) and `y` (with `X` bound to `0` and `T` bound to `nat`).  The pattern `v : ?T` will match any of the hypotheses, both the ones with bodies and the ones without.

Here are two useful tactics involving this sort of thing:
```coq
Ltac subst_local :=
  repeat match goal with
         | [ v := _ |- _ ] => subst v
         end.
Ltac subst_evars :=
  repeat match goal with
         | [ v := ?e |- _ ] => is_evar e; subst v
         end.
```

Author: > `@name := @match_pattern : @match_pattern`

That's not the underlying syntax for `v := ?X : ?T`, which is actually `@name := @term10 : @term`.

The description for that `term` is "The expression `term10 : type` is a type cast expression. It enforces the type of `term10` to be `type`.".  When we have a hypothesis "y := 0 : nat", we're not coercing it.  How we word that description better?

Author: While there is this notation in `ssreflect.v` associated with `:`, there is no equivalent default notation, right?

`Notation "x : T" := (CoqCast x T) : core_scope.`

Author: > Note also that when @match_pattern is [?x ; ?y] (for list), the @name := @match_pattern fails to parse correctly, and instead there is an error about a missing :

The workaround is to use `(cons ?x ?y)` instead?  Is this a fixable bug or something we have to live with?  Generally I lean toward not documenting fixable bugs.

Author: How does this look?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/83934317-e9d77080-a764-11ea-8f16-c3358541b1ef.png)

Reviewer: > > `@name := @match_pattern : @match_pattern`
> 
> That's not the underlying syntax for `v := ?X : ?T`, which is actually `@name := @term10 : @term`.
> 
> The description for that `term` is "The expression `term10 : type` is a type cast expression. It enforces the type of `term10` to be `type`.". When we have a hypothesis "y := 0 : nat", we're not coercing it. How we word that description better?

I believe what happens is that the parsing code explicitly strips off outermost cast nodes and uses them to match the type instead.  See https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/9c26e583668827bff5159e7671c406ace8b2f3ae/plugins/ltac/g_ltac.mlg#L243-L250

> While there is this notation in `ssreflect.v` associated with `:`, there is no equivalent default notation, right?
> 
> `Notation "x : T" := (CoqCast x T) : core_scope.`

That's correct

Reviewer: > How does this look?

Looks good to me!

Reviewer: Though you might want to explicitly mention that `:` is overridden if you `Require Import ssreflect`

Reviewer: > The workaround is to use `(cons ?x ?y)` instead? Or `([?x ; ?y])`? Is this a fixable bug or something we have to live with? Generally I lean toward not documenting fixable bugs.

Yes, both of those work.  I don't know how to fix it, I suspect it requires knowing the parser gods much more deeply than I do.  I suspect it in fact requires multi-success parsing, and is thus not fixable, but I'm not sure.  @roglo or @ppedrot or @herbelin might whether or not (and how) to factorize the Ltac parser (or might know who knows) so that we can get both matches on https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/9c26e583668827bff5159e7671c406ace8b2f3ae/plugins/ltac/g_ltac.mlg#L242 and similar-looking matches with list notations in https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/9c26e583668827bff5159e7671c406ace8b2f3ae/plugins/ltac/g_ltac.mlg#L243 (i.e., so that `x := [?y ; ?z] : ?T` and `x := [?y ; ?z]` match the second rule), but I certainly don't.  And I don't see even in principle how this could be fixed for the singleton list notation.  So I'm inclined to think it's not really fixable.

Author: > I suspect it in fact requires multi-success parsing

If it's not ambiguous it should be possible to handle it.  One useful trick is to look ahead one or more tokens before making a parse decision.  Camlp5 b y default only looks at the next token.  If you can describe in words how to distinguish them, email me and I'll give a little thought.  Not in this PR, please!  Maybe just submit an issue and cc me (since I don't routinely read new issues).

multisuccess parsing, hmm, sounds dreadful--adds a lot of complexity.  If a multimatch fails, would we backtrack into the parser :-) ?

      If there are multiple :token:`match_hyp`\s in a branch, there may be multiple ways to match them to hypotheses.
      For :tacn:`match goal` and :tacn:`multimatch goal`, if the evaluation of the :token:`ltac_expr` fails,
      matching will continue with the next hypothesis combination.  When those are exhausted,
      the next alternative from any `context` constructs in the :token:`match_pattern`\s is tried and then,
      when the context alternatives are exhausted, the next branch is tried.
      :ref:`Example<match_goal_multiple_hyps_ex>`.

   `reverse`
      Hypothesis matching for :token:`match_hyp`\s normally begins by matching them from left to right,
      to hypotheses, last to first.  Specifying `reverse` begins matching in the reverse order, from
      first to last.  :ref:`Normal<match_goal_hyps_ex>` and :ref:`reverse<match_goal_hyps_rev_ex>` examples.

   :n:`|- @match_pattern`
      A pattern to match with the current goals

   .. todo PR next sentence seems confused, in which case I will drop it.  Is it?

   If the next to last proof context pattern fails then
   the last :n:`@ltac_expr` is evaluated to :n:`v` and :n:`v` is

>    applied.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what it means indeed.

   .. example:: Multiple ways to match hypotheses

      Every possible match for the hypotheses is evaluated until the right-hand
      side succeeds.  Note that `H1` and `H2` are never matched to the same hypothesis.
      Observe that the number of permutations can grow as the factorial
      of the number of hypotheses and hypothesis patterns.

      .. coqtop:: reset all

         Goal forall A B : Prop, A -> B -> (A->B).
         intros A B H.
         match goal with
         | H1 : _, H2 : _ |- _ => idtac "match " H1 H2; fail
         | _ => idtac
         end.

   .. todo need examples for:
      match_context_rule ::= [ {*, @match_hyp } |- @match_pattern ] => @ltac_expr
      match_hyp ::= | @name := {? [ @match_pattern ] : } @match_pattern

.. todo PR The following items (up to numgoals) are part of "value_tactic".  I'd like to make
   this a subsection and explain that they all return values.  How do I get a 5th-level section title?

Filling a term context
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following expression is not a tactic in the sense that it does not
produce subgoals but generates a term to be used in tactic expressions:

.. tacn:: context @ident [ @term ]

>    .. todo @term is actually @lconstr (term with holes), which is spliced away

Reviewer 2: `lconstr` does not mean "term with holes": `todo` to remove?

      Seems like it's worth restoring that distinction

   Replaces the context variable :n:`@ident` bound by a `context` pattern of a

>    match expression (Described :ref:`here<match_term_context>`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   match expression (described :ref:`here<match_term_context>`).
```

>    This expression evaluates replaces the hole of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This expression replaces the hole of the
```

Overall, this explanation is not clear and it seems like there are redundancies between the two sentences.

   value of :n:`@ident` by the value of :n:`@term`.  See the example below.

   :tacn:`context` is a :token:`value_tactic`.

   .. exn:: Not a context variable.
      :undocumented:

   .. exn:: Unbound context identifier @ident.
      :undocumented:

   .. example:: Substituting a matched context

      .. coqtop:: reset all

         Goal True /\ True.
         match goal with
         | |- context G [True] => let x := context G [False] in idtac x
         end.

Generating fresh hypothesis names
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tactics sometimes need to generate new names for hypothesis.  Letting |Coq|
choose a name with the intro tactic is not so good since it is
very awkward to retrieve that name. The following
expression returns an identifier:

.. tacn:: fresh {* {| @string | @qualid } }

   Evaluates to an identifier unbound in the goal. This fresh identifier
   is formed by concatenating the value of each :n:`@qualid`,

>    which has to refer to an unqualified name, and :n:`string`.

Reviewer 2: Do you understand what this means? Because I don't.
I was expecting the following to yield `bamHbam : True` but in fact it yields `barHbar : True`:

```coq
Module foo.
Ltac bar := ident:(bam).
End foo.

Goal True -> True.
let H := fresh foo.bar "H" foo.bar in intro H.
```

Reviewer: Based on your example, I think it should say something like
```suggestion
   Evaluates to an identifier unbound in the goal. This fresh identifier
   is formed by concatenating the name of each :n:`@qualid`, after dropping any qualified components,
   and the value of each :n:`string`.
```

Author: If it just drops the qualifiers, we should consider changing the syntax to use `ident` instead of `qualid`.

Author: Also it should complain earlier about this:

```
let x := fresh X ";" in idtac x.

Invalid character ';' in identifier "X;".
```

Reviewer: Both of these seem like things worth opening bug reports about.

   :tacn:`fresh` is a :token:`value_tactic`.

Computing in a term: eval
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Evaluation of a term can be performed with:

.. tacn:: eval @red_expr in @term

   :tacn:`eval` is a :token:`value_tactic`.

Getting the type of a term
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: type of @term

   This tactic returns the type of :token:`term`.

   :tacn:`type of` is a :token:`value_tactic`.

Manipulating untyped terms: type_term
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :n:`uconstr : ( @term )` construct can be used to build an untyped term.
See :token:`syn_value`.

.. tacn:: type_term @one_term

   In |Ltac|, an untyped term can contain references to hypotheses or to
   |Ltac| variables containing typed or untyped terms. An untyped term can be
   type checked with :tacn:`type_term` whose argument is parsed as an
   untyped term and returns a well-typed term which can be used in tactics.

   :tacn:`type_term` is a :token:`value_tactic`.

Untyped terms built using :n:`uconstr :` can be used as arguments to the
:tacn:`refine` tactic, for example. In that case the untyped term is type
checked against the conclusion of the goal, and the holes which are not solved

> by the typing procedure are turned into new subgoals.

Reviewer 2: I think this example should be moved next to the description of `uconstr:` and does not belong with the description of `type_term`.

.. _match_with_holes_ex:

   .. example:: Matching a pattern with holes

      Notice the :tacn:`idtac` prints ``(z + 1)`` while the :tacn:`pose` substitutes
      ``(x + 1)``.

      .. coqtop:: in reset

         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all

           match constr:(fun x => (x + 1) * 3) with
           | fun z => ?y * 3 => idtac "y =" y; pose (fun z: nat => y * 5)
           end.

.. _match_vs_lazymatch_ex:

   .. example:: Comparison of match, multimatch and lazymatch

      .. todo PR: how do match and multimatch differ?**

      .. coqtop:: reset in

         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all

         match False with
         | False => idtac "try"; fail
         | _ => easy
         end.

      .. coqtop:: reset in

         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all

         multimatch False with
         | False => idtac "try"; fail
         | _ => easy
         end.

      .. coqtop:: reset in

         Goal True.

      .. coqtop:: all fail

         lazymatch False with
         | False => idtac "try"; fail
         | _ => easy
         end.

.. _ltac-match-goal:

Pattern matching on goals: match goal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> .. todo PR The title seems incomplete, should be "goals and hypotheses", right?

Reviewer 2: Yes. Sometimes people say simply "goal" to mean the actual "goal" to prove and its goal context.

.. tacn:: fun {+ @name } => @ltac_expr

   Indeed, local definitions of functions are syntactic sugar for binding
   a :n:`fun` tactic to an identifier.

   :tacn:`fun` is a :token:`binder_tactic`.

> The return value of a function is the value from the last expression.  For example:

Reviewer: I think it's ambiguous what "last" means here.  It doesn't mean sequencing-last.

Author: What is a correct description then?

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence well enough to see what it's trying to get across.  I might say
```suggestion
The return value of a function is the value that results from evaluating its body.  For example:
```
(This assumes we've defined the body of a function, or that it'll be obvious.)  It's not clear to me what this sentence adds, though, and if I'm losing some bit of explanation here.

Author: I was thinking about this example you gave the other day,, where "ret." is the return value.  Is it like OCaml where the last @ltac_expr in a function is the return value?

```
Ltac cache_term val id :=
  let H := fresh in
  let id := fresh id in
  let ty := type of val in
  let __ := lazymatch goal with
            | _ => simple refine (let H : ty := _ in _);
                   [ transparent_abstract exact val using id | ]
            end in
  let ret := (eval cbv delta [H] in H) in
  let __ := lazymatch goal with _ => clear H end in
  ret.
```

Reviewer: > Is it like OCaml where the last @ltac_expr in a function is the return value?

No.  In OCaml and Ltac2, `a; b` has the return value of `b`.  In Ltac1, `a; b` throws errors if either `a` or `b` has any return value other than `idtac`.  The only way to get a tactic to have a non-tactic return value is to ensure that it is a single expression with no sequencing which evaluates to something that is not a tactic.

Author: How about this?

A tactic can return a non-tactic value only by ending the expression with the idiom :n:`let … in @ident`.

Reviewer: > A tactic can return a non-tactic value only by ending the expression with the idiom :n:`let … in @ident`.

That is worse; consider the following tactics which return non-tactic values:
```coq
Ltac unit := ().
Ltac get_goal := match goal with |- ?G => G end.
Ltac get_some_hyp := multimatch goal with H : _ |- _ => H end.
Ltac get_True := constr:(True).
Ltac head x := match x with ?f _ => head f | _ => x end.
Ltac thunk f := fun _ => f.
```
I don't believe there's a concise description of when things return tactics vs not.  Consider the following two tactics:
```coq
Ltac this_is_a_tactic_value :=
  let x := match constr:(True) with
           | True => idtac
           | False => constr:(I)
           end in
  x.
Ltac this_is_not_a_tactic_value :=
  let x := match constr:(False) with
           | True => idtac
           | False => constr:(I)
           end in
  x.
```
The only difference is which branch of the `match` is taken.

Author: I'll just say that functions can return values of any type and leave it at that.  The value types in Ltac seem a bit underdeveloped.  Maybe better in Ltac2.

Do you think it makes any sense to extend Ltac/Ltac2 to make them more like general-purpose scripting languages?  Not sure myself; fleshing out the language in a good way would be a lot of work and might distract developers from other more valuable tasks.

Reviewer: Things are much better in Ltac2, which is a lot closer to OCaml in its semantics.  I don't think it makes much sense to flesh out Ltac1 that much, given that it'll eventually be deprecated in favor of Ltac2, I believe.

> .. todo Another problem with the coqtop directive example:: Returning a value from a function

Reviewer: What's the problem?

Author: #12435

   The wrapping in `let ... lazymatch` is essential.  It works because :tacn:`lazymatch`

>    gets its first match during the evaluation phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   executes its first match during the evaluation phase.
```
"gets" is ambiguous

   :tacn:`fun` is a :token:`binder_tactic`.

Functions can return values of any type.

A function application is an expression of the form:

> .. tacn:: @qualid {+ @tactic_arg }

Reviewer: Note that the grammar table still uses the `*` form; is this mismatch intentional?

Author: Oversight; the grammar-editing is not entirely foolproof (> 2000 lines of edit instructions!)

   :n:`@qualid` must be bound to a |Ltac| function
   with at least as many arguments as the provided :n:`@tactic_arg`\s.
   The :n:`@tactic_arg`\s are evaluated before the function is applied
   or partially applied.

>    Functions may be defined with both the :tacn:`fun` tactic
>    and the :cmd:`Ltac` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Functions may be defined with both the :tacn:`fun` tactic,
   the :tacn:`let` tactic, and the :cmd:`Ltac` command.
```
We can also define functions with `let f x := ... in ...`

      metavariables in the form :n:`?@ident`.  :g:`_` can be used to match
      irrelevant terms.  :ref:`Example<match_with_holes_ex>`.

      .. todo Didn't understand the following 2 paragraphs well enough to revise

>          would like to get an example for each

Reviewer: Example from https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r435577241 :
Here is an example (perhaps not the best one, because it relies on the trick of `match a with b => c end` reducing the `match` away):
```coq
Ltac uncurry f :=
  lazymatch f with
  | fun (a : ?A) (b : ?B) => ?f (* note the lack of `@?` *)
    => let ab := fresh in
       uncurry (fun ab : A * B => match fst ab, snd ab with a, b => f end)
  | ?f => f
  end.

Goal True.
  let x := uncurry (fun (a b c : unit) (d e : nat) => (a, b, c, d, e)) in
  pose x.
  (* 1 subgoal (ID 38)

  p := fun H0 : unit * unit * unit * nat * nat =>
       (fst (fst (fst (fst H0))), snd (fst (fst (fst H0))),
       snd (fst (fst H0)), snd (fst H0), snd H0)
   : unit * unit * unit * nat * nat -> unit * unit * unit * nat * nat
  ============================
  True
   *)
```
Here is a variant that doesn't use that
```coq
Ltac uncurry f :=
  lazymatch (eval cbv beta in f) with
  | fun (a : ?A) (b : ?B) => ?f (* note the lack of `@?` *)
    => uncurry ((fun F (ab : A * B) => F (fst ab) (snd ab)) (fun (a : A) (b : B) => f))
  | ?f => f
  end.

Goal True.
  let x := uncurry (fun (a b c : unit) (d e : nat) => (a, b, c, d, e)) in
  pose x.
  (* 1 subgoal (ID 38)

  p := fun H0 : unit * unit * unit * nat * nat =>
       (fst (fst (fst (fst H0))), snd (fst (fst (fst H0))),
       snd (fst (fst H0)), snd (fst H0), snd H0)
   : unit * unit * unit * nat * nat -> unit * unit * unit * nat * nat
  ============================
  True
   *)
```
Does this explain it?

Note also that you are already making use of this feature in `_match_with_holes_ex:`

As for the second paragraph, here's the same tactic but written using second-order pattern matching:
```coq
Ltac uncurry f :=
  lazymatch (eval cbv beta in f) with
  | fun (a : ?A) (b : ?B) => @?f a b
    => uncurry (fun ab : A * B => f (fst ab) (snd ab))
  | ?f => f
  end.
```

Perhaps a better example of the former is swapping args:
```coq
Ltac swap_args f :=
  lazymatch f with
  | fun (a : ?A) (b : ?B) => ?f
    => constr:(fun (b : B) (a : A) => f)
  end.
```
But you can also do with with a neat trick of `@?` patterns:
```coq
Ltac swap_args f :=
  lazymatch f with
  | fun a b => @?f b a (* note the reversed order *)
    => f
  end.

Goal True.
  let f := swap_args (fun x y => x + y) in
  pose f. (* fun y x : nat => x + y : nat -> nat -> nat *)
```

Author: I think I'll leave this as a "todo" for future PRs.  The example is a bit long; I'd want to make it as simple as possible (but no simpler).

Reviewer: Sounds good.  Perhaps link to this discussion in the todo, so that we can find it again (otherwise it'll be quite hard to find, I think).

Author: Yup, that's what I've been doing.  There are 8 such links so far.

      into :n:`@ltac_expr` before it's applied.  Note that metavariables are not
      prefixed with the question mark as they are in :token:`cpattern`.

      If :token:`ltac_expr` evaluates to a tactic, then it is

>       applied. If the tactic succeeds, the list of resulting subgoals is the
>       result of the match expression. If :token:`ltac_expr` does not evaluate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      applied. If the tactic succeeds, the unit value of :tacn:`idtac` is the
      result of the match expression. If :token:`ltac_expr` does not evaluate
```

Author: Meaning it it is the no-op tactic--not another type of value as is in OCaml, right?  Maybe don't need to say "unit value"?

Reviewer: Yes, that's correct.  (There is a separate value of unit type, denoted `()`, which is not valid as a tactic to be run on the goal, and the result is not that value.)  I'd also be fine with 
```suggestion
      applied. If the tactic succeeds, the tactic value :tacn:`idtac` is the
      result of the match expression. If :token:`ltac_expr` does not evaluate
```
or
```suggestion
      applied. If the tactic succeeds, the tactic :tacn:`idtac` is the
      result of the match expression. If :token:`ltac_expr` does not evaluate
```
or

```suggestion
      applied. If the tactic succeeds, the result of the match expression
      is :tacn:`idtac`. If :token:`ltac_expr` does not evaluate
```

   .. todo There's a more realistic example from @JasonGross here:
      https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r432996954

   :n:`@ltac_expr`
      The tactic to apply if the construct matches.  Metavariable values from the pattern
      match are substituted
      into :n:`@ltac_expr` before it's applied.  Note that metavariables are not
      prefixed with the question mark as they are in :token:`cpattern`.

      If :token:`ltac_expr` evaluates to a tactic, then it is
      applied. If the tactic succeeds, the result of the match expression is
      :tacn:`idtac`.  If :token:`ltac_expr` does not evaluate
      to a tactic, that value is the result of the match expression.

      If :n:`@ltac_expr` is a tactic with backtracking points, then subsequent

>       failures (after the `*match*` construct) can cause this tactic to backtrack.

Reviewer: This is false.
```suggestion
      failures (after the `*match*` construct) will only cause this tactic to backtrack if the `match` construct is a `multimatch` or `lazymatch`.
```
```coq
Goal True.
  try (match goal with _ => idtac "A" + idtac "B" end; fail). (* A *)
  try (lazymatch goal with _ => idtac "A" + idtac "B" end; fail). (* A B *)
  try (multimatch goal with _ => idtac "A" + idtac "B" end; fail). (* A B *)
```

Author: That's because `match` is implemented as `once multimatch`, right?

I have this now:

      If :n:`@ltac_expr` is a tactic with backtracking points, then subsequent
      failures after a :tacn:`lazymatch` or :tacn:`multimatch` (but not :tacn:`match`) can cause
      backtracking into :n:`@ltac_expr` to select its next success.
      (:tacn:`match` :n:`…` is equivalent to :tacn:`once` :tacn:`multimatch` `…`.
      The :tacn:`once` prevents backtracking into the :tacn:`match` after it has succeeded.)

Reviewer: Sounds good! 👍

Reviewer: And yes, that's correct.

   .. note::
      Each |Ltac| construct is processed in two phases: an evaluation phase and an execution phase.
      In most cases, tactics that may change the proof state are applied in the second phase.

>       (Constructs that generate integer, string or syntactic values such as :tacn:`fresh`

Reviewer: Grammar nit:
```suggestion
      (Constructs that generate integer, string, or syntactic values, such as :tacn:`fresh`,
```

      Matches any term with a subterm matching :token:`cpattern`. If there is a match
      and :n:`@ident` is present, it is assigned the "matched
      context", i.e. the initial term where the matched subterm is replaced by a
      hole. The example below shows how to use such term contexts.  Note that `context`
      (with very similar syntax) appearing after the `=>` is the :tacn:`context` tactic.

      For :tacn:`match` and :tacn:`multimatch`, if the evaluation of the :token:`ltac_expr`
      fails, the next matching subterm is tried. If no further subterm matches, the next branch
      is tried.  Matching subterms are considered from top to bottom and from left to
      right (with respect to the raw printing obtained by setting the
      :flag:`Printing All` flag).  :ref:`Example<match_term_context_ex>`.

   .. todo There's a more realistic example from @JasonGross here:
      https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#discussion_r432996954

   .. todo @term after context is actually @lconstr_pattern (term with holes), which is spliced away

>       Maybe worth restoring that distinction?

Reviewer: It' s quite important that you can bind variables in the term after `context`, i.e., that it allows `?X` patterns.

   .. note::
      |Ltac| constructs are processed in two phases: an evaluation phase and an execution phase.
      In most cases, tactics that may change the proof state are applied in the second phase.

      Unlike other tactics, `*match*` tactics get their first success (applying tactics to do

>       so) as part of the evaluation phase.  This can affect how early failures are processed

Reviewer: This places too much weight on `assert_fails`.  This feature is quite useful independently from the `assert_*` tactics.  I'd suggest
```suggestion
      so) as part of the evaluation phase.  Among other things, this can affect how early failures are processed
```

      Hypotheses are matched from the first hypothesis to the last until the :tacn:`apply` succeeds.

      .. coqtop:: reset all

         Goal forall A B : Prop, A -> B -> (A->B).
         intros.
         match reverse goal with
         | H : _ |- _ => idtac "apply " H; apply H
         end.

.. _match_goal_multiple_hyps_ex:

   .. example:: Multiple ways to match hypotheses

      Every possible match for the hypotheses is evaluated until the right-hand
      side succeeds.  Note that `H1` and `H2` are never matched to the same hypothesis.
      Observe that the number of permutations can grow as the factorial
      of the number of hypotheses and hypothesis patterns.

      .. coqtop:: reset all

         Goal forall A B : Prop, A -> B -> (A->B).
         intros A B H.
         match goal with
         | H1 : _, H2 : _ |- _ => idtac "match " H1 H2; fail
         | _ => idtac
         end.

   .. todo need examples for:
      match_context_rule ::= [ {*, @match_hyp } |- @match_pattern ] => @ltac_expr
      match_hyp ::= | @name := {? [ @match_pattern ] : } @match_pattern

.. todo PR The following items (up to numgoals) are part of "value_tactic".  I'd like to make

>    this a subsection and explain that they all return values.  How do I get a 5th-level section title?

Reviewer 2: You just use a new symbol. Most of the time I use `^^^^^^^^^` after `~~~~~~~~~~~~`.

Author: That seems to work, however visually the difference between 4th and 5th levels is almost imperceptible (4th uses 20 point, 5th uses 18.4 point:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/83336933-32c28d00-a26c-11ea-9eb4-ed78594d428b.png)

They don't show up in the table of contents, either, which I'd like:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/83336961-5a195a00-a26c-11ea-95ad-0acc26fc8376.png)

Reviewer 2: Indeed, this is what I was telling you earlier regarding the use of such a subsection level in the changelog. In the case of the changelog, the solution was to introduce an inline (local) TOC (cf. https://coq.github.io/doc/master/refman/changes.html#changes-in-8-12-beta1). In the case of the Ltac chapter though, I think the right solution is to have fewer subsections. The current situation with one heading per Ltac construct is an inheritance from before the Sphinx migration, but I don't think we should keep it as is. (Not saying it should be fixed in this PR though.)

Filling a term context
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following expression is not a tactic in the sense that it does not
produce subgoals but generates a term to be used in tactic expressions:

.. tacn:: context @ident [ @term ]

   .. todo @term is actually @lconstr (term with holes), which is spliced away
      Seems like it's worth restoring that distinction

   Replaces the context variable
   :n:`@ident` bound by a context pattern of a
   match expression. This expression evaluates replaces the hole of the
   value of :n:`@ident` by the value of :n:`@ltac_expr`.

   :tacn:`context` is a :token:`value_tactic`.

   .. exn:: Not a context variable.

>       :undocumented:

Reviewer: No, it's not redundant, but I think they should perhaps be merged (or else this bit should absolutely be linked to from the explanation in the `match` section), as you need this form to understand what the `@ident` does in matching on a context.  In particular, the example in the match section is an example of both forms.

>       :undocumented:

Author: @JasonGross OK, IIUC you need to use them together to make a substitution, as in this contrived example that I'll add for the `context` tactic.  But seems better to keep them separate but linked in the doc:

```
Goal True /\ True.

match goal with
| |- context G [True] => let x := context G [False] in idtac x
end.

(* (False /\ True) *)
```

>       :undocumented:

Reviewer: > OK, IIUC you need to use them together to make a substitution

This is correct.  You can use the `match` form without the substitution form, but not the other way around (and the `ident` between `context` and `[...]` in the `match` form is useless without the substitution form).

If you want a less contrived example, here's a useful tactic from fiat-crypto:
```coq
Ltac split_in_context_by ident funl funr tac :=
  repeat match goal with
         | [ H : context p [ident] |- _ ] =>
           let H0 := context p[funl] in
           let H1 := context p[funr] in
           let H0' := (eval cbv beta in H0) in
           let H1' := (eval cbv beta in H1) in
           assert H0' by (tac H);
           assert H1' by (tac H);
           clear H
         end.
Ltac split_in_context ident funl funr :=
  split_in_context_by ident funl funr ltac:(fun H => apply H).

Ltac split_iff := split_in_context iff (fun a b : Prop => a -> b) (fun a b : Prop => b -> a).

Ltac split_contravariant_or := split_in_context_by or (fun A B : Prop => A) (fun A B : Prop => B) ltac:(fun H => intros; eauto 100 using H, or_introl, or_intror, ex_intro, exist, existT with nocore).

Ltac split_and := split_in_context and (fun a b : Type => a) (fun a b : Type => b).
Ltac split_prod := split_in_context prod (fun a b : Type => a) (fun a b : Type => b).
```

It lets you do nifty things like
```coq
Goal forall f g : nat -> Prop, (forall x, f x <-> g x) -> f 0 -> g 0.
  intros.
  (* 1 subgoal (ID 6)

  f, g : nat -> Prop
  H : forall x : nat, f x <-> g x
  H0 : f 0
  ============================
  g 0
   *)
  auto. (* no-op *)
  split_iff.
  (* 1 subgoal (ID 17)

  f, g : nat -> Prop
  H0 : f 0
  H1 : forall x : nat, f x -> g x
  H2 : forall x : nat, g x -> f x
  ============================
  g 0
   *)
  auto.
Qed.
```

>       :undocumented:

Author: An interesting example, thanks.  I added a todo on the `context` tactic linking here.  I think it would be more appropriate in a future section or chapter that covers Ltac techniques.  It would need a bit of explanation.

   :tacn:`compute`, :tacn:`simpl`, :tacn:`cbv`, :tacn:`lazy`, :tacn:`unfold`,
   :tacn:`fold`, :tacn:`pattern`.

   :tacn:`eval` is a :token:`tactic_arg`.

Getting the type of a term
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: type of @term

   This tactic returns the type of :token:`term`.

   :tacn:`type of` is a :token:`tactic_arg`.

Manipulating untyped terms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: uconstr : ( @term )

   .. todo PR This is defined programmatically rather in the mlgs.  If
      you do "Print Grammar tactic", it lists 28 others similar to uconstr
      at the very end under "tactic_arg".  Not sure how to document these

>       or even if all of them should be documented.

Reviewer: Why shouldn't we be documenting `tactic_arg`?  I believe all of them should be documented somehow.  Though perhaps for most of them we just want to say that `foo:( @foo )` causes the text inside the parens to be parsed as a `@foo`, and that this is true for the following syntax entries, and then list all of them?

Reviewer: The special `tactic_arg`s (that don't follow this pattern) are: `fresh`, `type_term`, `numgoals`, and `constr_eval` (which itself is a different grammar entry not printed by `Print Grammar tactic`)
The ones that sort-of follow this are `glob_constr_with_bindings` (parses `constr_with_bindings`), `casted_constr` (parses `constr`), `lglob` (parses `lconstr`), `glob` (parses `constr`), `ltac` (parses `tactic_expr5`), `open_constr` (parses `lconstr`), `ipattern` (parses `simple_intropattern`), `constr` (parses `lconstr`), `uconstr` (parses `constr`)

Author: > Why shouldn't we be documenting tactic_arg?

I wanted to know whether some of them might be obsolete or deprecated before I wrote it up.  I see that the labels `lglob`, `lconstr`, `open_constr`, `constr` and `uconstr` all refer to the nonterminal `constr:lconstr`, which seems odd; AFAIK `lconstr` is for terms that may have `?ident` or `_` in them.  Both `casted_constr` and `glob` refer to `constr.constr`.

I wonder why this list is different from the `Tactic Notation` list.

Author: Also see https://github.com/coq/coq/issues/12302.

Reviewer 2: > AFAIK `lconstr` is for terms that may have `?ident` or `_` in them

No, this is a misunderstanding of yours. `lconstr` is `term` and `constr` is `one_term`. The only relevant distinction between the two is the one that is explained in the [note about `one_term`](https://coq.github.io/doc/master/refman/language/core/basic.html#grammar-token-term). Both of them can be used as patterns. Cf. `Search` for an example which use `constr` / `one_term` for patterns.

      to a tactic, that value is the result of the match expression.

      If :n:`@ltac_expr` is a tactic with backtracking points, then subsequent
      failures after a :tacn:`lazymatch` or :tacn:`multimatch` (but not :tacn:`match`) can cause
      backtracking into :n:`@ltac_expr` to select its next success.
      (:tacn:`match` :n:`…` is equivalent to :tacn:`once` :tacn:`multimatch` `…`.
      The :tacn:`once` prevents backtracking into the :tacn:`match` after it has succeeded.)

   .. note::
      Each |Ltac| construct is processed in two phases: an evaluation phase and an execution phase.
      In most cases, tactics that may change the proof state are applied in the second phase.

>       (Tactics that generate integer, string or syntactic values

Reviewer: I liked the "constructs" language better, but feel free to use whatever you think is best
```suggestion
      (Constructs that generate integer, string, or syntactic values, such as :tacn:`fresh`,
```

Author: We are describing `fresh` et al as tactics.  Not certain we'll call compound tactics like `+`, `||, etc tactics for the longer term.  In this case, I think "tactic" is better because the previous sentence uses "tactic".  It avoids the reader wondering whether "tactic" and "construct" mean the same thing.  I've "construct" in some places, sometimes for variety.

      .. coqtop:: all fail

>          Fail lazymatch True with

Reviewer: I think you forgot to get rid of the `fail` part of `.. coqtop:: all fail`

      .. coqtop:: all fail

>          Fail match True with

Reviewer: Again, I think you forgot to get rid of the `fail`

      .. coqtop:: all fail

>          Fail multimatch True with

Reviewer: Here too, there should not be `fail`

   The terms built in |Ltac| are well-typed by default. It may not be
   appropriate for building large terms using a recursive |Ltac| function: the
   term has to be entirely type checked at each step, resulting in potentially
   very slow behavior. It is possible to build untyped terms using |Ltac| with
   the :n:`uconstr : @term` syntax.

   :tacn:`type_term` is a :token:`value_tactic`.

.. tacn:: type_term @one_term

   An untyped term, in |Ltac|, can contain references to hypotheses or to
   |Ltac| variables containing typed or untyped terms. An untyped term can be
   type checked using the function type_term whose argument is parsed as an
   untyped term and returns a well-typed term which can be used in tactics.

   :tacn:`type_term` is a :token:`value_tactic`.

Untyped terms built using :n:`uconstr :` can also be used as arguments to the
:tacn:`refine` tactic. In that case the untyped term is type
checked against the conclusion of the goal, and the holes which are not solved
by the typing procedure are turned into new subgoals.

Counting goals: numgoals
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: numgoals

   The number of goals under focus can be recovered using the :n:`numgoals`

>    function. Combined with the guard command below, it can be used to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   function. Combined with the :tacn:`guard` tactic below, it can be used to
```

   (see :tacn:`match`).  Each current goal is processed independently.

   :n:`{*, @match_hyp }`
      Patterns to match with hypotheses.  Each pattern must match a distinct hypothesis in order
      for the branch to match.

      Hypotheses have the form :n:`@name {? := @term__binder } : @type`.  Patterns bind each of
      these nonterminals separately:

      .. list-table::
         :widths: 2 1
         :header-rows: 1

         * - Pattern syntax
           - Example pattern

         * - :n:`@name : @match_pattern__type`
           - `n : ?t`

         * - :n:`@name := @match_pattern__binder`
           - `n := ?b`

         * - :n:`@name := @term__binder : @type`
           - `n := ?b : ?t`

         * - :n:`@name := [ @match_pattern__binder ] : @match_pattern__type`
           - `n := [ ?b ] : ?t`

      ..

         :token:`name` can't have a `?`.  Note that the last two forms are equivalent except that:

         - if the `:` in the third form has been bound to something else in a notation, you must use the fourth form.
           Note that cmd:`Require Import` `ssreflect` loads a notation that does this.

>          - a :n:`@term__binder` in the form `[ ?l ]` must be parenthesized or, for the fourth form, use double brackets:

Reviewer: Perhaps
```suggestion
         - a :n:`@term__binder` in the form `[ ?l ]` (e.g., denoting a singleton list after :cmd:`Import` `ListNotations`) must be parenthesized or, for the fourth form, use double brackets:
```
?

Author: I'll use your wording for now.  Maybe revisit this after the pattern matching and unification sections have been written.  However:  `[ ?l ]` won't match `[ a; b]`??  That's not what I'd expect.  Is that a bug or a feature?

Reviewer: `[ ?l ]` will match everything, including `[a; b]` and `[]` and `1` and `nat`.  This is the surprising thing.  By contrast, if I write `[ ?l ]` in a pattern elsewhere, it only matches the singleton list.

Author: I should have said `[ [ ?l ] ]` or `( [ ?l ] )`.  They will match `[a; b]` and `[]` but not `1` and `nat`, right?

Author: @JasonGross says: Don't have my computer on my right now, so replying by email (feel free to splice this info the thread).

No, `([?l])` is syntactic sugar for the pattern `cons ?l nil`, which does not match `[]` (`nil`) nor `[x; y]` (`cons x (cons y nil)`).

      first to last.  :ref:`Normal<match_goal_hyps_ex>` and :ref:`reverse<match_goal_hyps_rev_ex>` examples.

   :n:`|- @match_pattern`

>       A pattern to match with the current goals

Reviewer: Why this change?

Author: Because I expect if you have `split; match goal ...` it processes each goal independently like the other constructs.  (Though a little tedious to repeat that everywhere.)

Reviewer: Indeed, `match` processes each goal independently.  I think we're on the same page about semantics, but on different pages about text interpretation; to me, "A pattern to match with the current goals" suggests/implies "this single pattern will be matched against all current goals; if it matches all of them, the branch triggers (once, on all goals), while if it fails to match any of them, it fails to match overall".  The "process each goal independently" should go to the `match` statement as a whole, I believe; by the time the code is looking at `@match_pattern`, there is only one goal under focus / only one current goal.

   .. exn:: Condition not satisfied.
      :undocumented:

Proving a subgoal as a separate lemma: abstract
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: abstract @ltac_expr2 {? using @ident }

   Does a :tacn:`solve` :n:`[ @ltac_expr2 ]` and saves the subproof as an auxiliary lemma.
   if :token:`ident` is specified, the lemma is saved with that name; otherwise
   the lemma is saved with the name `NAME_subproofN` where
   `NAME` is the name of the current goal and `N` is
   a fresh name. The auxiliary lemma is inlined in the final proof term.

   This is useful with tactics such as :tacn:`omega` or
   :tacn:`discriminate` that generate huge proof terms. It makes the
   the subsequent Save command faster without having to
   manually split the proof into smaller lemmas.

   .. todo PR Does this mean a net time saving across the entire proof
      or is it just moving some of the Save work into abstract?  Or is
      some non-linear, non-zero sum effect here?

   It may be useful to generate lemmas minimal w.r.t. the assumptions they
   depend on. This can be obtained thanks to the option below.

   :tacn:`abstract` is an :token:`l3_tactic`.

>    .. todo PR above: what "option below"??

Reviewer: bfbb9f063434623d7c3dac8aa4aaf64c4ec84373 added the text
```tex
It may be useful to generate lemmas minimal w.r.t. the assumptions they depend
on. This can be obtained thanks to the option below.

\begin{quote}
\optindex{Shrink Abstract}
{\tt Set Shrink Abstract}
\end{quote}

When set, all lemmas generated through \texttt{abstract {\tacexpr}} are
quantified only over the variables that appear in the term constructed by
\texttt{\tacexpr}.
```
The option text was removed with the removal of `Shrink Abstract` in #6903, but I guess the initial sentence was left behind.  It should be removed.  I believe the shrinkage now always happens, as can be confirmed with
```coq
Lemma foo : True -> True.
Proof.
  intros.
  abstract exact I.
Defined.
Print foo.
Print foo_subproof.
```

   .. exn:: Condition not satisfied.
      :undocumented:

Proving a subgoal as a separate lemma: abstract
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. todo PR should this be adjacent to the description of "solve"?

>    Should the reference below to :n:`solve @ltac_expr` be to solve [ ... ]?

Reviewer 2: I think it makes sense to keep this at the end as this is very special.
You are correct on ``` :n:`solve @ltac_expr` ``` actually being ``` :n:`solve [ @ltac_expr ]` ```

Author: Meaning don't move it at all?

Reviewer 2: Yep

.. tacn:: abstract @ltac_expr2 {? using @ident }

>    Does a :tacn:`solve` :n:`@ltac_expr` and saves the subproof as an auxiliary lemma.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Does a :tacn:`solve` :n:`@ltac_expr2` and saves the subproof as an auxiliary lemma.
```

   if :token:`ident` is specified, the lemma is saved with that name; otherwise
   the lemma is saved with the name `NAME_subproofN` where
   `NAME` is the name of the current goal and `N` is
   a fresh name. The auxiliary lemma is inlined in the final proof term.

   This is useful with tactics such as :tacn:`omega` or
   :tacn:`discriminate` that generate huge proof terms. It makes the
   the subsequent Save command faster without having to
   manually split the proof into smaller lemmas.

   .. todo PR Does this mean a net time saving across the entire proof
      or is it just moving some of the Save work into abstract?  Or is

>       some non-linear, non-zero sum effect here?

Reviewer: I believe there are rare corner cases where evar normalization is non-linear in the number of evars, and so abstracting can result in a net time saving.  But this is pretty rare, I believe, and most of the time `abstract` makes the proof a tiny bit slower.  However, there is an enormous saving of peak memory usage, because `abstract` will compact the proof state early, resulting in the ability to reuse memory across branches.  Additionally, you can decrease the *net* time of reflective proofs by up to a factor of 2 by using the pattern `abstract exact_no_check foo`, wherein you fail fast when the `exact` fails, but you don't need to check that the exact succeeds twice.

Author: Just curious, "compacting the proof state" meaning discarding proof steps/states within Stm that are associated with the `abstract`?  I'd love to understand what factors drive peak memory usage--does that mostly affect only complex/long-running Ltac tactics?  At first thought, I'd expect memory usage would grow as the product of the proof term and the number of proof steps.

Author: How about this description?

   This is useful with tactics such as :tacn:`omega` or
   :tacn:`discriminate` that generate huge proof terms.  It can
   significantly reduce peak memory use.  In most cases it doesn't
   have a significant impact on run time.  One case in which it can
   help is when a tactic `foo` is known to always pass type checking when it
   succeeds, such as in reflective proofs.  In this case, the idiom
   ":tacn:`abstract` :tacn:`exact_no_check` `foo`" will save half the type
   checking type time compared to ":tacn:`exact` `foo`".

Reviewer: > Just curious, "compacting the proof state" meaning discarding proof steps/states within Stm that are associated with the `abstract`? I'd love to understand what factors drive peak memory usage--does that mostly affect only complex/long-running Ltac tactics? At first thought, I'd expect memory usage would grow as the product of the proof term and the number of proof steps.

I don't believe it's the stm, since the stm registers no states, AIUI, within a single sentence.  I believe instead it is about evar normalization and discarding the evar representation of instantiated evars.  I believe the relevant operation is the one invoked by the vernacular `Optimize Proof`.  I don't have a good sense of memory usage, in large part due to lack of fine-grained profiling, cf https://github.com/coq/coq/issues/11926 and https://github.com/coq/coq/issues/11926

Reviewer: > How about this description?
> 
> This is useful with tactics such as :tacn:`omega` or
> :tacn:`discriminate` that generate huge proof terms. It can
> significantly reduce peak memory use. In most cases it doesn't
> have a significant impact on run time. One case in which it can
> help is when a tactic `foo` is known to always pass type checking when it
> succeeds, such as in reflective proofs. In this case, the idiom
> ":tacn:`abstract` :tacn:`exact_no_check` `foo`" will save half the type
> checking type time compared to ":tacn:`exact` `foo`".

I'd suggest "generate huge proof terms with many intermediate goals" or "generate huge proof terms with many intermediate evars" (or perhaps "internal" rather than "intermediate") rather than just "generate huge proof terms".  I don't think it's just about the size of the proof term, but about how expensive it is to evar-normalize the proof term.

Maybe "One case in which it can help with performance" instead of "One case in which it can help".  Helping with memory is already helping.  (Or alternatively, use "One other" or "One other notable" instead of just "One" to start this sentence.)

Otherwise, that description looks good to me!

Defining |Ltac| functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

|Ltac| toplevel definitions are made as follows:

.. cmd:: Ltac @tacdef_body {* with @tacdef_body }
   :name: Ltac

   .. insertprodn tacdef_body tacdef_body

   .. prodn::

>       tacdef_body ::= @qualid {+ @name } {| := | ::= } @ltac_expr
>       | @qualid {| := | ::= } @ltac_expr

Reviewer 2: Could be simplified into:
```suggestion
      tacdef_body ::= @qualid {* @name } {| := | ::= } @ltac_expr
```

   Defines a new |Ltac| function that can be used in any tactic
   script or new |Ltac| toplevel definition.

   If the :attr:`local` attribute is specified, the tactic definition will not be
   exported outside the current module.

   :token:`qualid`
      Name of the tactic being defined

   :n:`{+ @name }`
      Parameters of the tactic being defined

   `:=`
      Defines a user-defined tactic, but gives an error if a tactic
      has already been defined with the specified name.

      .. exn:: There is already an Ltac named @qualid
         :undocumented:

   `::=`
      Redefines an existing user-defined tactic, but gives an error if no
      tactic has been defined with the specified name.  The redefinition
      applies across module boundaries.

      .. exn: There is no Ltac named @qualid

   :n:`{* with @tacdef_body }`

>       Permits definition of recursive and mutually recursive tactics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Permits definition of mutually recursive tactics.
```

.. tacn:: fresh {* {| @string | @qualid } }

   .. todo you can't have a :tacn: with the same name as a :gdef: for now,
      eg `fresh` can't be both

>    Returns a fresh identifier name (i.e. one that is not already used in the context).

Reviewer: Not sure if it's worth talking about here, but this context is the goal context concatenated with the tactic-local Ltac context.  For example
```coq
Goal True -> True.
  intro x.
  let f := fun _ => fresh "x" in
  let a := fresh "x" in
  let b := fresh "x" in
  let c := fresh "x" in
  let f2 := fun _ => fresh "x" in
  let d := f () in
  let e := f () in
  let g := f2 () in
  let h := f2 () in
  idtac a b c d e g h. (* x0 x1 x2 x0 x0 x3 x3 *)
```
This is very subtle behavior that might trip up authors of Ltac automation (and has in fact tripped me up).

Author: I think it's worth including.  Seems a bit of a bug, not a useful feature.

I take it the "fun" saves the state of the context, so it a "fresh" within will always give the same value?  But a global definition using "fresh" will work as expected?  

And there is some tracking of what fresh has returned so a, b and c are different even though x0 x1 x2 are not in the context yet?

What can we recommend as best practice to avoid this?

Author: @JasonGross Any response?

Reviewer: > I think it's worth including. Seems a bit of a bug, not a useful feature.

Yep
 
> I take it the "fun" saves the state of the context, so it a "fresh" within will always give the same value?

Yes.

> But a global definition using "fresh" will work as expected?

No, the same issue shows up in global Ltac definitions which are recursive; invocations of `fresh` in the recursive call aren't aware of the invocation of `fresh` in the parent caller.

> And there is some tracking of what fresh has returned so a, b and c are different even though x0 x1 x2 are not in the context yet?

Yes

> What can we recommend as best practice to avoid this?

Always use Ltac2?  (Ltac2 lets you be explicit about which identifiers you're avoiding.)  Make the `fresh` and the corresponding `intro`/`pose`/whatever is using the name be close together, with no intervening calls to anything that might generate names?

Author: First: to apply a function, you must provide at least one argument, right?

Is this correct?

> A function application is an expression of the form:

> .. tacn:: @qualid {+ @tactic_arg }

>   :n:`@qualid` must be bound to a |Ltac| function
   with at least as many arguments as the provided :n:`@tactic_arg`\s.
   The :n:`@tactic_arg`\s are evaluated before the function is applied
   or partially applied.
   
>   Note that functions may be defined with both :tacn:`fun` and :cmd:`Ltac`.

Second: it seems global assignments such as `Ltac a := 1` are not useful,  right?  If you define 
a global function, that work, not sure if that's often useful.  And `Ltac x := intro` is fine.

```
  Ltac n := 1.
  idtac n.
(* n not found *)

  Ltac n := fun _ => 1.
  let n2 := n () in idtac n2.
(* 1 *)

  Ltac x := intro.
  x.
(* applies "intro" *)
```

Reviewer: > First: to apply a function, you must provide at least one argument, right?

This is a question of how you define function.  As I see it, there's only a presentational question here, not a technical one, and I'd like to defer to you and @Zimmi48 about this.  (If there is in fact a technical question, let me know, e.g., by giving two snippets of Ltac to pseudo-Ltac, and I can answer with my understanding.)

> :n:`@qualid` must be bound to a |Ltac| function
> with at least as many arguments as the provided :n:`@tactic_arg`\s.

This is almost correct, and the way it's incorrect might not be worth noting.  Consider the following example:
```coq
Ltac gobble0 x :=
  lazymatch x with
  | 0 => gobble0
  | _ => x
  end.

Goal True.
  let y := gobble0 0 0 1 in
  idtac y.
```
This is very silly, but how many arguments does `gobble0` have?  I'd say one, because the expression underneath the first `fun x => ...` is not another `fun`.  But it also sort-of has infinitely many arguments.  I do sometimes do things like
```coq
Ltac foo x :=
  let y := some_expensive_computation in
  fun z => ...
```
And then I'll bind `foo x` (or `foo x z`) to some identifier and then later apply it multiple times.

> Second: it seems global assignments such as `Ltac a := 1` are not useful, right?

By contrast, I use this to define configurable options for my scripts.  Consider:
```coq
Ltac verbose := constr:(false).

Ltac if_verbose tac :=
  lazymatch verbose with
  | true => tac ()
  | _ => idtac
  end.

Ltac do_stuff :=
  if_verbose ltac:(fun _ => idtac "intro");
  intro;
  if_verbose ltac:(fun _ => idtac "constructor");
  constructor.

Goal True -> True. do_stuff. Qed.
Ltac verbose ::= constr:(true).
Goal True -> True. do_stuff. Qed.
```
Very useful for, e.g., debugging reficiation tactics.

>     Ltac n := 1.
>     idtac n.
>     (* n not found *)

The correct version of this is
```coq
Ltac n := 1.
Goal True.  let nv := n in idtac nv. (* 1 *)
```

Author: >> First: to apply a function, you must provide at least one argument, right?
> This is a question of how you define function.

And what are those ways? I don't know what you have in mind.  If one argument is required, then I can resolve the apparent ambiguity described here https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#issuecomment-639993027 by indicating at least one parameter is needed.

I'll pass on describing gobble for now.  It seems very unlike other languages, not easy to explain.

> The correct version of this is
> ```coq
> Ltac n := 1.
> Goal True.  let nv := n in idtac nv. (* 1 *)
```
So substitution only applies to let-defined and pattern-defined variables, not top-level symbols.

I was not expecting to start a long discussion here :-(.

Reviewer: > And what are those ways? I don't know what you have in mind. If one argument is required, then I can resolve the apparent ambiguity described here [#12103 (comment)](https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12103#issuecomment-639993027) by indicating at least one parameter is needed.

I think my point it that regardless of which way you resolve the parsing ambiguity, the semantics are the same, at least insofar as I'm aware.  So you can be like "yes, a function needs at least one argument, and then we have a separate case for top-level symbols" or you can be like "0-argument-functions are a thing, they behave just like top-level symbols", and it doesn't matter as far as understanding how Ltac programs are interpreted and run.

> I'll pass on describing gobble for now. It seems very unlike other languages, not easy to explain.

Yep, sounds good.  Adam pointed out to me in conversation today that you can actually get a similar effect in OCaml using ADTs (and of course you can get something like this in Gallina with dependent types), but I agree that it's not a central case in Ltac programming, and not worth describing at this point

> So substitution only applies to let-defined and pattern-defined variables, not top-level symbols.

This is true of substitution in `idtac`.  Probably also substitution in `fresh`.  This is also the case when you write `constr:(fun x => ...)`, where if `x` is an Ltac variable that has been let-bound, it'll look inside `x` for a name, but if `x` is a global Ltac, it'll just use the identifier `x`.  I have a feel for this corner of Ltac, but not a complete description of it, alas.  (I guess in some built-in constructs, "substitution of things in the local Ltac context" is used rather than more general Ltac expression-evaluation, and that's what's going on here.)

> I was not expecting to start a long discussion here :-(.

Yeah, Ltac is unpleasantly complicated.  I'd like to see this PR merged soon, too.

      eg `fresh` can't be both

   Returns a fresh identifier name (i.e. one that is not already used in the context
   and not previously returned by :tacn:`fresh` in the current :token:`ltac_expr`).
   The fresh identifier is formed by concatenating the final :token:`ident` of each :token:`qualid`
   (dropping any qualified components) and each specified :token:`string`.
   If the resulting name is already used, a number is appended to make it fresh.
   If no arguments are given, the name is a fresh derivative of the name ``H``.

   .. note:: We recommend generating the fresh identifier immediately before
      adding it in the proof context.  Using :tacn:`fresh` in a local function
      may not work as you expect:

      Successive :tacn:`fresh`\es give distinct names even if the names haven't
      yet been added to the proof context:

      .. coqtop:: reset none

         Goal True -> True.

      .. coqtop:: out

         intro x.

      .. coqtop:: all

         let a := fresh "x" in
         let b := fresh "x" in
         idtac a b.

      When applying :tacn:`fresh` in a function, the name is chosen based on the

>       proof context at the point where the function was defined:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      tactic context at the point where the function was defined:
```
c.f.
```coq
Goal True -> True.
  let f := fun _ => fresh "H" in
  intro H;
    let n := f () in
    idtac n. (* H0, not H, even though H wasn't in the proof context *)
```

Author: Will change, although "tactic context" is not defined anywhere.

   .. exn:: Condition not satisfied.
      :undocumented:

Proving a subgoal as a separate lemma: abstract
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tacn:: abstract @ltac_expr2 {? using @ident }

   Does a :tacn:`solve` :n:`[ @ltac_expr2 ]` and saves the subproof as an auxiliary lemma.
   if :token:`ident` is specified, the lemma is saved with that name; otherwise

>    the lemma is saved with the name `NAME_subproofN` where
>    `NAME` is the name of the current goal and `N` is
>    a fresh name. The auxiliary lemma is inlined in the final proof term.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   the lemma is saved with the name :n:`@ident_subproof{? @num }` where
   :n`@ident` is the name of the current goal and :n:`{? @num }` is chosen
   so that the resulting name is fresh. The auxiliary lemma is inlined in the final proof term.
```

Author: Details:
- Needed to used ```:n:`@ident`\ `_subproof`\ :n:`{? @num }` ``` here
- I didn't like "name of the current goal" at all--I've not seen that phrase before.  The best I could think of was to add "(e.g. the theorem name)".
- Not sure what "The auxiliary lemma is inlined in the final proof term." means.  If I print `Exists_dec` in `Lists.v`, I see the lemma names but I don't see anything inlined.  `Search "Exists_dec"` doesn't show any lemma--where is it?  Seems like you should be able to see it.

```
Exists_dec = 
fun (l : list A) (Pdec : forall x : A, {P x} + {~ P x}) =>
list_rec (fun l0 : list A => {Exists l0} + {~ Exists l0}) (right Exists_dec_subproof)
  (fun (a : A) (l' : list A) (Hrec : {Exists l'} + {~ Exists l'}) =>
   match Hrec with
   | left Hl' => left (Exists_cons_tl a Hl')
   | right Hl' =>
       let s := Pdec a in
       match s with
       | left Ha => left (Exists_cons_hd l' Ha)
       | right Ha => right (Exists_dec_subproof0 Hl' Ha)
       end
   end) l
     : forall l : list A, (forall x : A, {P x} + {~ P x}) -> {Exists l} + {~ Exists l}

Arguments Exists_dec _%list_scope _%function_scope
```

Reviewer: The auxiliary lemma is inlined in the final proof term *only* when the theorem is closed with `Qed`.  Consider:
```coq
Lemma foo : True. Proof. abstract exact I. Qed.
Lemma fooT : True. Proof. abstract exact I. Defined.
Print foo.
(* foo = (fun foo_subproof : True => foo_subproof) I
     : True
 *)
Print fooT.
(* fooT = fooT_subproof
     : True
*)
```

> Search "Exists_dec" doesn't show any lemma--where is it? 

This is because of https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/0ae20176df146b90f11e131aff3673584e6ffb3a/theories/Init/Prelude.v#L59 If you do
```coq
Require Import Coq.Lists.List.
Remove Search Blacklist "_subproof".
Search "Exists_dec".
(* Exists_dec_subproof: forall (A : Type) (P : A -> Prop), ~ Exists P nil
Exists_dec_subproof0:
  forall (A : Type) (P : A -> Prop) (a : A) (l' : list A),
  ~ Exists P l' -> ~ P a -> ~ Exists P (a :: l')
Exists_dec:
  forall (A : Type) (P : A -> Prop) (l : list A),
  (forall x : A, {P x} + {~ P x}) -> {Exists P l} + {~ Exists P l}
Forall_Exists_dec:
  forall (A : Type) (P : A -> Prop),
  (forall x : A, {P x} + {~ P x}) ->
  forall l : list A, {Forall P l} + {Exists (fun x : A => ~ P x) l}
*)
```

   This is useful with tactics such as :tacn:`omega` or
   :tacn:`discriminate` that generate huge proof terms with many intermediate

>    goals.  It can significantly reduce peak memory use.  In most cases it doesn't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   goals.  It can significantly reduce peak memory use at :cmd:`Qed`\-time.  In most cases it doesn't
```

I'm not sure of this. @JasonGross please confirm

Reviewer: I think this is wrong.  I believe it significantly reduces peak memory usage across the entire proof script.

   have a significant impact on run time.  One case in which it can reduce run time
   is when a tactic `foo` is known to always pass type checking when it
   succeeds, such as in reflective proofs.  In this case, the idiom
   ":tacn:`abstract` :tacn:`exact_no_check` `foo`" will save half the type
   checking type time compared to ":tacn:`exact` `foo`".

   It may be useful to generate lemmas minimal w.r.t. the assumptions they
   depend on. This can be obtained thanks to the option below.

   :tacn:`abstract` is an :token:`l3_tactic`.

>    .. todo PR above: what "option below"??

Reviewer 2: Same question. @JasonGross: do you know?

Reviewer: bfbb9f063434623d7c3dac8aa4aaf64c4ec84373 added the text
```tex
It may be useful to generate lemmas minimal w.r.t. the assumptions they depend
on. This can be obtained thanks to the option below.

\begin{quote}
\optindex{Shrink Abstract}
{\tt Set Shrink Abstract}
\end{quote}

When set, all lemmas generated through \texttt{abstract {\tacexpr}} are
quantified only over the variables that appear in the term constructed by
\texttt{\tacexpr}.
```
The option text was removed with the removal of `Shrink Abstract` in #6903, but I guess the initial sentence was left behind.  It should be removed.  I believe the shrinkage now always happens, as can be confirmed with
```coq
Lemma foo : True -> True.
Proof.
  intros.
  abstract exact I.
Defined.
Print foo.
Print foo_subproof.
```

   .. warning::

      The abstract tactic, while very useful, still has some known

>       limitations.  See https://github.com/coq/coq/issues/9146 for more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      limitations.  See `#9146 <https://github.com/coq/coq/issues/9146>`_ for more
```

      details. We recommend caution when using it in some
      "non-standard" contexts. In particular, ``abstract`` doesn't
      work properly when used inside quotations ``ltac:(...)``.
      If used as part of typeclass resolution, it may produce incorrect
      terms when in polymorphic universe mode.

   .. warning::

      Provide :token:`ident` at your own risk; explicitly named and reused subterms
      don’t play well with asynchronous proofs.

   .. tacn:: transparent_abstract @ltac_expr3
      :name: transparent_abstract

>       Save the subproof in a transparent lemma rather than an opaque one.

Reviewer: Given the discussion above on naming, we might want to explicitly add here that the automatically generated name uses `_subterm` rather than `_subproof`

Author: I see it using `instance_subterm` in Theorem foobar.  The prefix is always `instance_`?

Reviewer 2: I see `foobar_subterm` with this example and Coq 8.11.1:
```coq
Theorem foobar : True.
transparent_abstract easy.
Show Proof.
```

Which example did you take and which version of Coq?

Author: test-suite/success/transparent_abstract.v

Reviewer: I believe the prefix is `instance_` when `transparent_abstract` is invoked from typeclass resolution on an anonymous hole.

         Use this feature at your own risk; building computationally relevant
         terms with tactics is fragile.

>    .. tacn:: transparent_abstract @ltac_expr3 using @ident

Reviewer 2: Why is this a separate `tacn` instead of being a `{? using @ident }` clause in the one above?

> Defining |Ltac| functions

Reviewer 2: I'm not convinced the term "function" should be used since there may be no parameters. I would say "Defining toplevel |Ltac| objects" instead. (If this is changed, it should also be adapted in the description.)

Author: What do you have against functions with no parameters?  Most languages support them.  Most of our users won't be OCaml programmers.

Reviewer 2: I don't have anything against them, but there is already a notion of function in `ltac_expr`, it is `fun ... => ...`. `Ltac foo parameters := bar` is a shorthand for `Ltac foo := fun parameters => bar` so it does define a function but `Ltac foo := bar` doesn't.

Author: OK.  BTW, see #12469

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

|Ltac| toplevel definitions are made as follows:

.. cmd:: Ltac @tacdef_body {* with @tacdef_body }
   :name: Ltac

   .. insertprodn tacdef_body tacdef_body

   .. prodn::
      tacdef_body ::= @qualid {* @name } {| := | ::= } @ltac_expr

>    Defines a new |Ltac| function that can be used in any tactic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Defines or redefines an |Ltac| function that can be used in any tactic
```

Author: Nope, doesn't permit redefinition.  The message is documented a few lines below.

   script or new |Ltac| toplevel definition.

   If the :attr:`local` attribute is specified, the tactic definition will not be
   exported outside the current module.

   :token:`qualid`
      Name of the tactic being defined

>    :n:`{+ @name }`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :n:`{* @name }`
```

   .. prodn::
      tacdef_body ::= @qualid {* @name } {| := | ::= } @ltac_expr

   Defines or redefines an |Ltac| symbol.

   If the :attr:`local` attribute is specified, the definition will not be
   exported outside the current module.

   :token:`qualid`
      Name of the symbol being defined or redefined

   :n:`{* @name }`
      If specified, the symbol defines a function with the given parameter names.
      If no names are specified, :token:`qualid` is assigned the value of :token:`ltac_expr`.

   `:=`
      Defines a user-defined symbol, but gives an error if the symbol has already
      been defined.

>    .. todo inconsistency: "Ltac intros := idtac" redefines/hides an existing tactic
>       You can't use ::=

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. todo apparent inconsistency: "Ltac intros := idtac" seems like it redefines/hides an existing tactic,
      but in fact it creates a tactic which can only be called by it's qualified name.  This is true in general
      of tactic notations.  The only way to overwrite most primitive tactics, and any user-defined tactic
      notation, is with another tactic notation.
```

      .. exn:: There is already an Ltac named @qualid
         :undocumented:

   `::=`

>       Redefines an existing user-defined symbol, but gives an error if the
>       symbol doesn't exist.  If :attr:`local` is not specified, the redefinition

Reviewer: I liked the version with `tactic` better, but I'm also okay with the `symbol` version.
```suggestion
      Redefines an existing user-defined tactic, but gives an error if no
      tactic has been defined with the specified name.  Note that :cmd:`Tactic Notation`\s
      do not count as user-defined tactics for `::=`.  If :attr:`local` is not specified, the redefinition
```

Author: Well, in `Ltac n ::= 2`, n is not a tactic.

Reviewer: Ah, okay.  I'm a bit concerned that "user-defined symbol" might make it sound like we can redefine things like `Definition n := 1` with `Ltac n ::= 2`, which is not the case.

Author: Perhaps, but they would figure that out pretty quickly.  The context for this text is Ltac definitions, not all of Coq, so thinking it refers to `Definition`s would be a little odd.

   to find out what went wrong. It is disabled by default for performance
   reasons.

Tracing execution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. cmd:: {? @attributes } {? @toplevel_selector : } Info @num @ltac_expr {| . | ... }
   :name: Info

   Prints the trace of the path eventually taken by an
   |Ltac| script. That is, the list of executed tactics, discarding
   all the branches which have failed. To that end the :cmd:`Info` command can be
   used with the following syntax.

   The command doesn't follow the syntax convention used by other commands.  To be precise, the
   syntax shown above is as for an additional production for :token:`sentence`.  The command is only

>    valid in proof mode.

Reviewer 2: I think this presentation is too heavy and doesn't bring much (especially considering that this command doesn't support any attribute at the current time!).  I would instead leave the `.. cmd::` exactly as it was before, and adapt the paragraph explaining that this command is different to say "This command is only valid in proof mode and can be used wherever a top-level tactic would be accepted. Therefore, it accepts goal selectors." (No need to remind about `...`.)

   This flag enables and disables the profiler.

.. cmd:: Show Ltac Profile {? {| CutOff @int | @string } }

   Prints the profile.

   :n:`CutOff @int`
      By default, tactics that account for less than 2% of the total time are not displayed.

>       `CutOff` lets you specify a different percentage for a single command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      `CutOff` lets you specify a different percentage.
```
I'm not sure what "for a single command" adds here

   This flag enables and disables the profiler.

.. cmd:: Show Ltac Profile {? {| CutOff @int | @string } }

   Prints the profile.

   :n:`CutOff @int`

>       to be added

Reviewer 2: I'm pretty sure this is something that @JasonGross can explain (he may have been the one to introduce it in fact).

Reviewer: By default, `Show Ltac Profile` will hide any tactics which account for (when descendants are included) less than 2% of the total time.  The number `2` can be replaced by any other non-negative integer `n` by specifying `Show Ltac Profile CutOff n`.  (`Show Ltac Profile` is the same as `Show Ltac Profile CutOff 2`, unless you've passed (apparently undocumented!) option `-profile-ltac-cutoff` with another number (which is then used instead).

   and allow displaying and resetting the profile from tactic scripts for
   benchmarking purposes.

.. tacn:: show ltac profile {? {| cutoff @int | @string } }
   :name: show ltac profile

>    Behaves like the corresponding vernacular command :cmd:`Show Ltac Profile`,

Reviewer 2: Let's reduce a bit the use of "vernacular" in the doc:
```suggestion
   Behaves like the corresponding command :cmd:`Show Ltac Profile`,
```

Note that the `reset ltac profile` above could be similarly adapted to link to the corresponding command.

.. tacn:: optimize_heap
   :name: optimize_heap

   This tactic behaves like :tacn:`idtac`, except that running it compacts the
   heap in the OCaml run-time system. It is analogous to the Vernacular
   command :cmd:`Optimize Heap`.

.. tacn:: info @ltac_expr

   :tacn:`info` is a :token:`binder_tactic`.

.. tacn:: infoH @ltac_expr3

>    :tacn:`infoH` is an :token:`l3_tactic`.

Reviewer 2: Since 8.5, `info` says:

```
Warning:
The general "info" tactic is currently not working. There is an "Info" command to replace it.
Some specific verbose tactics may also exist, such as info_eauto. [deprecated-info-tactical,deprecated]
```

and `infoH`:

```
<infoH></infoH>
```

Sounds like a good time to remove them. If you want to do this, please open a separate PR. We could backport it to v8.12 if it is merged before releasing the beta.

   This flag enables and disables the profiler.

> .. cmd:: Show Ltac Profile {? {| CutOff @int | @string } }

Reviewer 2: @JasonGross Why can't the user provide both a `string` and a `CutOff`?

Reviewer: It'd be pretty easy to implement that, just change https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/0ae20176df146b90f11e131aff3673584e6ffb3a/plugins/ltac/profile_ltac.ml#L452-L454
to pass along a `cutoff` argument, change https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/0ae20176df146b90f11e131aff3673584e6ffb3a/plugins/ltac/profile_ltac.mli#L53 to match, and then update the command syntax to allow it at https://github.com/coq/coq/blob/0ae20176df146b90f11e131aff3673584e6ffb3a/plugins/ltac/profile_ltac_tactics.mlg#L75-L82

Reviewer: As for why it's not already implemented, I think it was never deemed especially useful.  In fact the only cutoff I've ever used other than the default one is `0`, to see everything, and usually I don't want to see everything but only under a specific string.

Author: @Zimmi48 It might be helpful if GitHub had a checkmark emoji that reviewers could add to indicate they're done with a conversation without resolving it (maybe with the convention that the PR submitter resolves things.  Or if 2 reviewers have commented in a single item, would make it easy to see if both have read the last comment.  WDYT?  👍 ?

Reviewer 2: Feel free to send feedback to GitHub: https://support.github.com/contact/feedback
Don't hesitate to link to the PR to show the kind of size that this can get.

.. tacn:: optimize_heap
   :name: optimize_heap

   This tactic behaves like :tacn:`idtac`, except that running it compacts the
   heap in the OCaml run-time system. It is analogous to the Vernacular
   command :cmd:`Optimize Heap`.

.. tacn:: infoH @ltac_expr3

>    .. Used by Proof General.  See https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/12423.

Reviewer 2: Please document as an internal tactic used by Proof General.
